volpone childless rich feigns sick despairs offers
his state to hopes of several heirs lies languishing: his
parasite receives presents of all assures deludes then weaves other
cross plots which ope themselves are told. new tricks for safety are
sought they thrive: when bold each tempts the other again and all are
sold. prologue. now luck yet sends us and a little wit will serve to 
make our play hit according to the palates of the season here is rhime 
not empty of reason. this we were bid to credit from our poet whose true 
scope if you would know it in all his poems still hath been this measure 
to mix profit with your pleasure and not as some whose throats their 
envy failing cry hoarsely all he writes is railing: and when his plays 
come forth think they can flout them with saying he was a year about 
them. to this there needs no lie but this his creature which was two 
months since no feature and though he dares give them five lives to mend 
it tis known five weeks fully pennd it from his own hand without a 
coadjutor novice journeyman or tutor. yet thus much i can give you as a 
token of his plays worth no eggs are broken nor quaking custards with 
fierce teeth affrighted wherewith your rout are so delighted nor hales 
he in a gull old ends reciting to stop gaps in his loose writing with 
such a deal of monstrous and forced action as might make bethlem a 
faction: nor made he his play for jests stolen from each table but makes 
jests to fit his fable and so presents quick comedy refined as best 
critics have designed the laws of time place persons he observeth from 
no needful rule he swerveth. all gall and copperas from his ink he 
draineth only a little salt remaineth wherewith hell rub your cheeks 
till red with laughter they shall look fresh a week after. act . scene 
.. a room in volpones house. enter volpone and mosca. volp: good morning 
to the day and next my gold: open the shrine that i may see my saint. 
mosca withdraws the curtain and discovers piles of gold plate jewels 
etc. hail the worlds soul and mine more glad than is the teeming earth 
to see the longdfor sun peep through the horns of the celestial ram am i 
to view thy splendour darkening his that lying here amongst my other 
hoards shewst like a flame by night or like the day struck out of chaos 
when all darkness fled unto the centre. o thou son of sol but brighter 
than thy father let me kiss with adoration thee and every relick of 
sacred treasure in this blessed room. well did wise poets by thy 
glorious name title that age which they would have the best thou being 
the best of things: and far transcending all style of joy in children 
parents friends or any other waking dream on earth: thy looks when they 
to venus did ascribe they should have given her twenty thousand cupids 
such are thy beauties and our loves dear saint riches the dumb god that 
givst all men tongues that canst do nought and yet makst men do all 
things the price of souls even hell with thee to boot is made worth 
heaven. thou art virtue fame honour and all things else. who can get 
thee he shall be noble valiant honest wise mos: and what he will sir. 
riches are in fortune a greater good than wisdom is in nature. volp: 
true my beloved mosca. yet i glory more in the cunning purchase of my 
wealth than in the glad possession since i gain no common way i use no 
trade no venture i wound no earth with ploughshares fat no beasts to 
feed the shambles have no mills for iron oil corn or men to grind them 
into powder: i blow no subtle glass expose no ships to threatnings of 
the furrowfaced sea i turn no monies in the public bank nor usure 
private. mos: no sir nor devour soft prodigals. you shall have some will 
swallow a melting heir as glibly as your dutch will pills of butter and 
neer purge for it tear forth the fathers of poor families out of their 
beds and coffin them alive in some kind clasping prison where their 
bones may be forthcoming when the flesh is rotten: but your sweet nature 
doth abhor these courses you lothe the widdows or the orphans tears 
should wash your pavements or their piteous cries ring in your roofs and 
beat the air for vengeance. volp: right mosca i do lothe it. mos: and 
besides sir you are not like a thresher that doth stand with a huge 
flail watching a heap of corn and hungry dares not taste the smallest 
grain but feeds on mallows and such bitter herbs nor like the merchant 
who hath filld his vaults with romagnia and rich candian wines yet 
drinks the lees of lombards vinegar: you will not lie in straw whilst 
moths and worms feed on your sumptuous hangings and soft beds you know 
the use of riches and dare give now from that bright heap to me your 
poor observer or to your dwarf or your hermaphrodite your eunuch or what 
other householdtrifle your pleasure allows maintenance. volp: hold thee 
mosca gives him money. take of my hand thou strikst on truth in all and 
they are envious term thee parasite. call forth my dwarf my eunuch and 
my fool and let them make me sport. exit mos. what should i do but 
cocker up my genius and live free to all delights my fortune calls me to 
i have no wife no parent child ally to give my substance to but whom i 
make must be my heir: and this makes men observe me: this draws new 
clients daily to my house women and men of every sex and age that bring 
me presents send me plate coin jewels with hope that when i die which 
they expect each greedy minute it shall then return tenfold upon them 
whilst some covetous above the rest seek to engross me whole and 
counterwork the one unto the other contend in gifts as they would seem 
in love: all which i suffer playing with their hopes and am content to 
coin them into profit to look upon their kindness and take more and look 
on that still bearing them in hand letting the cherry knock against 
their lips and draw it by their mouths and back again. how now reenter 
mosca with nano androgyno and castrone. nan: now room for fresh 
gamesters who do will you to know they do bring you neither play nor 
university show and therefore do entreat you that whatsoever they 
rehearse may not fare a whit the worse for the false pace of the verse. 
if you wonder at this you will wonder more ere we pass for know here is 
inclosed the soul of pythagoras that juggler divine as hereafter shall 
follow which soul fast and loose sir came first from apollo and was 
breathd into aethalides mercurius his son where it had the gift to 
remember all that ever was done. from thence it fled forth and made 
quick transmigration to goldylockd euphorbus who was killed in good 
fashion at the siege of old troy by the cuckold of sparta. hermotimus 
was next i find it in my charta to whom it did pass where no sooner it 
was missing but with one pyrrhus of delos it learnd to go a fishing and 
thence did it enter the sophist of greece. from pythagore she went into 
a beautiful piece hight aspasia the meretrix and the next toss of her 
was again of a whore she became a philosopher crates the cynick as it 
self doth relate it: since kings knights and beggars knaves lords and 
fools gat it besides ox and ass camel mule goat and brock in all which 
it hath spoke as in the coblers cock. but i come not here to discourse 
of that matter or his one two or three or his greath oath by quater his 
musics his trigon his golden thigh or his telling how elements shift but 
i would ask how of late thou best suffered translation and shifted thy 
coat in these days of reformation. and: like one of the reformed a fool 
as you see counting all old doctrine heresy. nan: but not on thine own 
forbid meats hast thou ventured and: on fish when first a carthusian i 
enterd. nan: why then thy dogmatical silence hath left thee and: of that 
an obstreperous lawyer bereft me. nan: o wonderful change when sir 
lawyer forsook thee for pythagores sake what body then took thee and: a 
good dull mule. nan: and how by that means thou wert brought to allow of 
the eating of beans and: yes. nan: but from the mule into whom didst 
thou pass and: into a very strange beast by some writers calld an ass by 
others a precise pure illuminate brother of those devour flesh and 
sometimes one another and will drop you forth a libel or a sanctified 
lie betwixt every spoonful of a nativity pie. nan: now quit thee for 
heaven of that profane nation and gently report thy next transmigration. 
and: to the same that i am. nan: a creature of delight and what is more 
than a fool an hermaphrodite now prithee sweet soul in all thy variation 
which body wouldst thou choose to keep up thy station and: troth this i 
am in: even here would i tarry. nan: cause here the delight of each sex 
thou canst vary and: alas those pleasures be stale and forsaken no tis 
your fool wherewith i am so taken the only one creature that i can call 
blessed: for all other forms i have proved most distressed. nan: spoke 
true as thou wert in pythagoras still. this learned opinion we celebrate 
will fellow eunuch as behoves us with all our wit and art to dignify 
that whereof ourselves are so great and special a part. volp: now very 
very pretty mosca this was thy invention mos: if it please my patron not 
else. volp: it doth good mosca. mos: then it was sir. nano and castrone 
sing.: fools they are the only nation worth mens envy or admiration: 
free from care or sorrowtaking selves and others merry making: all they 
speak or do is sterling. your fool he is your great mans darling and 
your ladies sport and pleasure tongue and bauble are his treasure. een 
his face begetteth laughter and he speaks truth free from slaughter hes 
the grace of every feast and sometimes the chiefest guest hath his 
trencher and his stool when wit waits upon the fool: o who would not be 
he he he knocking without. volp: whos that away exeunt nano and 
castrone. look mosca. fool begone exit androgyno. mos: tis signior 
voltore the advocate i know him by his knock. volp: fetch me my gown my 
furs and nightcaps say my couch is changing and let him entertain 
himself awhile without i the gallery. exit mosca. now now my clients 
begin their visitation vulture kite raven and gorcrow all my birds of 
prey that think me turning carcase now they come i am not for them yet 
reenter mosca with the gown etc. how now the news mos: a piece of plate 
sir. volp: of what bigness mos: huge massy and antique with your name 
inscribed and arms engraven. volp: good and not a fox stretchd on the 
earth with fine delusive sleights mocking a gaping crow ha mosca mos: 
sharp sir. volp: give me my furs. puts on his sick dress. why dost thou 
laugh so man mos: i cannot choose sir when i apprehend what thoughts he 
has without now as he walks: that this might be the last gift he should 
give that this would fetch you if you died today and gave him all what 
he should be tomorrow what large return would come of all his ventures 
how he should worshipd be and reverenced ride with his furs and 
footcloths waited on by herds of fools and clients have clear way made 
for his mule as letterd as himself be calld the great and learned 
advocate: and then concludes theres nought impossible. volp: yes to be 
learned mosca. mos: o no: rich implies it. hood an ass with reverend 
purple so you can hide his two ambitious ears and he shall pass for a 
cathedral doctor. volp: my caps my caps good mosca. fetch him in. mos: 
stay sir your ointment for your eyes. volp: thats true dispatch 
dispatch: i long to have possession of my new present. mos: that and 
thousands more i hope to see you lord of. volp: thanks kind mosca. mos: 
and that when i am lost in blended dust and hundred such as i am in 
succession volp: nay that were too much mosca. mos: you shall live still 
to delude these harpies. volp: loving mosca tis well: my pillow now and 
let him enter. exit mosca. now my faind cough my pthisic and my gout my 
apoplexy palsy and catarrhs help with your forced functions this my 
posture wherein this three year i have milkd their hopes. he comes i 
hear him uh coughing. uh uh uh o reenter mosca introducing voltore with 
a piece of plate. mos: you still are what you were sir. only you of all 
the rest are he commands his love and you do wisely to preserve it thus 
with early visitation and kind notes of your good meaning to him which i 
know cannot but come most grateful. patron sir heres signior voltore is 
come volp faintly.: what say you mos: sir signior voltore is come this 
morning to visit you. volp: i thank him. mos: and hath brought a piece 
of antique plate bought of st mark with which he here presents you. 
volp: he is welcome. pray him to come more often. mos: yes. volt: what 
says he mos: he thanks you and desires you see him often. volp: mosca. 
mos: my patron volp: bring him near where is he i long to feel his hand. 
mos: the plate is here sir. volt: how fare you sir volp: i thank you 
signior voltore where is the plate mine eyes are bad. volt putting it 
into his hands.: im sorry to see you still thus weak. mos aside.: that 
hes not weaker. volp: you are too munificent. volt: no sir would to 
heaven i could as well give health to you as that plate volp: you give 
sir what you can: i thank you. your love hath taste in this and shall 
not be unanswerd: i pray you see me often. volt: yes i shall sir. volp: 
be not far from me. mos: do you observe that sir volp: hearken unto me 
still it will concern you. mos: you are a happy man sir know your good. 
volp: i cannot now last long mos: you are his heir sir. volt: am i volp: 
i feel me going uh uh uh uh im sailing to my port uh uh uh uh and i am 
glad i am so near my haven. mos: alas kind gentleman well we must all go 
volt: but mosca mos: age will conquer. volt: pray thee hear me: am i 
inscribed his heir for certain mos: are you i do beseech you sir you 
will vouchsafe to write me in your family. all my hopes depend upon your 
worship: i am lost except the rising sun do shine on me. volt: it shall 
both shine and warm thee mosca. mos: sir i am a man that hath not done 
your love all the worst offices: here i wear your keys see all your 
coffers and your caskets lockd keep the poor inventory of your jewels 
your plate and monies am your steward sir. husband your goods here. 
volt: but am i sole heir mos: without a partner sir confirmd this 
morning: the wax is warm yet and the ink scarce dry upon the parchment. 
volt: happy happy me by what good chance sweet mosca mos: your desert 
sir i know no second cause. volt: thy modesty is not to know it well we 
shall requite it. mos: he ever liked your course sir that first took 
him. i oft have heard him say how he admired men of your large 
profession that could speak to every cause and things mere contraries 
till they were hoarse again yet all be law that with most quick agility 
could turn and re return could make knots and undo them give forked 
counsel take provoking gold on either hand and put it up: these men he 
knew would thrive with their humility. and for his part he thought he 
should be blest to have his heir of such a suffering spirit so wise so 
grave of so perplexd a tongue and loud withal that would not wag nor 
scarce lie still without a fee when every word your worship but lets 
fall is a chequin loud knocking without. whos that one knocks i would 
not have you seen sir. and yet pretend you came and went in haste: ill 
fashion an excuse. and gentle sir when you do come to swim in golden 
lard up to the arms in honey that your chin is born up stiff with 
fatness of the flood think on your vassal but remember me: i have not 
been your worst of clients. volt: mosca mos: when will you have your 
inventory brought sir or see a coppy of the will anon i will bring them 
to you sir. away be gone put business in your face. exit voltore. volp 
springing up.: excellent mosca come hither let me kiss thee. mos: keep 
you still sir. here is corbaccio. volp: set the plate away: the vultures 
gone and the old ravens come mos: betake you to your silence and your 
sleep: stand there and multiply. putting the plate to the rest. now 
shall we see a wretch who is indeed more impotent than this can feign to 
be yet hopes to hop over his grave. enter corbaccio. signior corbaccio 
youre very welcome sir. corb: how does your patron mos: troth as he did 
sir no amends. corb: what mends he mos: no sir: hes rather worse. corb: 
thats well. where is he mos: upon his couch sir newly falln asleep. 
corb: does he sleep well mos: no wink sir all this night. nor yesterday 
but slumbers. corb: good he should take some counsel of physicians: i 
have brought him an opiate here from mine own doctor. mos: he will not 
hear of drugs. corb: why i myself stood by while it was made saw all the 
ingredients: and know it cannot but most gently work: my life for his 
tis but to make him sleep. volp aside.: ay his last sleep if he would 
take it. mos: sir he has no faith in physic. corb: say you say you mos: 
he has no faith in physic: he does think most of your doctors are the 
greater danger and worse disease to escape. i often have heard him 
protest that your physician should never be his heir. corb: not i his 
heir mos: not your physician sir. corb: o no no no i do not mean it. 
mos: no sir nor their fees he cannot brook: he says they flay a man 
before they kill him. corb: right i do conceive you. mos: and then they 
do it by experiment for which the law not only doth absolve them but 
gives them great reward: and he is loth to hire his death so. corb: it 
is true they kill with as much license as a judge. mos: nay more for he 
but kills sir where the law condemns and these can kill him too. corb: 
ay or me or any man. how does his apoplex is that strong on him still 
mos: most violent. his speech is broken and his eyes are set his face 
drawn longer than twas wont corb: how how stronger then he was wont mos: 
no sir: his face drawn longer than twas wont. corb: o good mos: his 
mouth is ever gaping and his eyelids hang. corb: good. mos: a freezing 
numbness stiffens all his joints and makes the colour of his flesh like 
lead. corb: tis good. mos: his pulse beats slow and dull. corb: good 
symptoms still. mos: and from his brain corb: i conceive you good. mos: 
flows a cold sweat with a continual rheum forth the resolved corners of 
his eyes. corb: ist possible yet i am better ha how does he with the 
swimming of his head b: o sir tis past the scotomy he now hath lost his 
feeling and hath left to snort: you hardly can perceive him that he 
breathes. corb: excellent excellent sure i shall outlast him: this makes 
me young again a score of years. mos: i was a coming for you sir. corb: 
has he made his will what has he given me mos: no sir. corb: nothing ha 
mos: he has not made his will sir. corb: oh oh oh but what did voltore 
the lawyer here mos: he smelt a carcase sir when he but heard my master 
was about his testament as i did urge him to it for your good corb: he 
came unto him did he i thought so. mos: yes and presented him this piece 
of plate. corb: to be his heir mos: i do not know sir. corb: true: i 
know it too. mos aside.: by your own scale sir. corb: well i shall 
prevent him yet. see mosca look here i have brought a bag of bright 
chequines will quite weigh down his plate. mos taking the bag.: yea 
marry sir. this is true physic this your sacred medicine no talk of 
opiates to this great elixir corb: tis aurum palpabile if not potabile. 
mos: it shall be ministerd to him in his bowl. corb: ay do do do. mos: 
most blessed cordial this will recover him. corb: yes do do do. mos: i 
think it were not best sir. corb: what mos: to recover him. corb: o no 
no no by no means. mos: why sir this will work some strange effect if he 
but feel it. corb: tis true therefore forbear ill take my venture: give 
me it again. mos: at no hand pardon me: you shall not do yourself that 
wrong sir. i will so advise you you shall have it all. corb: how mos: 
all sir tis your right your own no man can claim a part: tis yours 
without a rival decreed by destiny. corb: how how good mosca mos: ill 
tell you sir. this fit he shall recover. corb: i do conceive you. mos: 
and on first advantage of his gaind sense will i reimportune him unto 
the making of his testament: and shew him this. pointing to the money. 
corb: good good. mos: tis better yet if you will hear sir. corb: yes 
with all my heart. mos: now would i counsel you make home with speed 
there frame a will whereto you shall inscribe my master your sole heir. 
corb: and disinherit my son mos: o sir the better: for that colour shall 
make it much more taking. corb: o but colour mos: this will sir you 
shall send it unto me. now when i come to inforce as i will do your 
cares your watchings and your many prayers your more than many gifts 
your this days present and last produce your will where without thought 
or least regard unto your proper issue a son so brave and highly 
meriting the stream of your diverted love hath thrown you upon my master 
and made him your heir: he cannot be so stupid or stonedead but out of 
conscience and mere gratitude corb: he must pronounce me his mos: tis 
true. corb: this plot did i think on before. mos: i do believe it. corb: 
do you not believe it mos: yes sir. corb: mine own project. mos: which 
when he hath done sir. corb: publishd me his heir mos: and you so 
certain to survive him corb: ay. mos: being so lusty a man corb: tis 
true. mos: yes sir corb: i thought on that too. see how he should be the 
very organ to express my thoughts mos: you have not only done yourself a 
good corb: but multiplied it on my son. mos: tis right sir. corb: still 
my invention. mos: las sir heaven knows it hath been all my study all my 
care i een grow gray withal how to work things corb: i do conceive sweet 
mosca. mos: you are he for whom i labour here. corb: ay do do do: ill 
straight about it. going. mos: rook go with you raven corb: i know thee 
honest. mos aside.: you do lie sir corb: and mos: your knowledge is no 
better than your ears sir. corb: i do not doubt to be a father to thee. 
mos: nor i to gull my brother of his blessing. corb: i may have my youth 
restored to me why not mos: your worship is a precious ass corb: what 
sayst thou mos: i do desire your worship to make haste sir. corb: tis 
done tis done i go. exit. volp leaping from his couch.: o i shall burst 
let out my sides let out my sides mos: contain your flux of laughter 
sir: you know this hope is such a bait it covers any hook. volp: o but 
thy working and thy placing it i cannot hold good rascal let me kiss 
thee: i never knew thee in so rare a humour. mos: alas sir i but do as i 
am taught follow your grave instructions give them words pour oil into 
their ears and send them hence. volp: tis true tis true. what a rare 
punishment is avarice to itself mos: ay with our help sir. volp: so many 
cares so many maladies so many fears attending on old age yea death so 
often calld on as no wish can be more frequent with them their limbs 
faint their senses dull their seeing hearing going all dead before them 
yea their very teeth their instruments of eating failing them: yet this 
is reckond life nay here was one is now gone home that wishes to live 
longer feels not his gout nor palsy feigns himself younger by scores of 
years flatters his age with confident belying it hopes he may with 
charms like aeson have his youth restored: and with these thoughts so 
battens as if fate would be as easily cheated on as he and all turns air 
knocking within. whos that there now a third mos: close to your couch 
again i hear his voice: it is corvino our spruce merchant. volp lies 
down as before.: dead. mos: another bout sir with your eyes. anointing 
them. whos there enter corvino. signior corvino come most wishd for o 
how happy were you if you knew it now corv: why what wherein mos: the 
tardy hour is come sir. corv: he is not dead mos: not dead sir but as 
good he knows no man. corv: how shall i do then mos: why sir corv: i 
have brought him here a pearl. mos: perhaps he has so much remembrance 
left as to know you sir: he still calls on you nothing but your name is 
in his mouth: is your pearl orient sir corv: venice was never owner of 
the like. volp faintly.: signior corvino. mos: hark. volp: signior 
corvino mos: he calls you step and give it him. hes here sir and he has 
brought you a rich pearl. corv: how do you sir tell him it doubles the 
twelfth caract. mos: sir he cannot understand his hearings gone and yet 
it comforts him to see you corv: say i have a diamond for him too. mos: 
best shew it sir put it into his hand tis only there he apprehends: he 
has his feeling yet. see how he grasps it corv: las good gentleman how 
pitiful the sight is mos: tut forget sir. the weeping of an heir should 
still be laughter under a visor. corv: why am i his heir mos: sir i am 
sworn i may not shew the will till he be dead but here has been 
corbaccio here has been voltore here were others too i cannot number em 
they were so many all gaping here for legacies: but i taking the vantage 
of his naming you signior corvino signior corvino took paper and pen and 
ink and there i asked him whom he would have his heir corvino. who 
should be executor corvino. and to any question he was silent too i 
still interpreted the nods he made through weakness for consent: and 
sent home th others nothing bequeathd them but to cry and curse. corv: o 
my dear mosca they embrace. does he not perceive us mos: no more than a 
blind harper. he knows no man no face of friend nor name of any servant 
who twas that fed him last or gave him drink: not those he hath begotten 
or brought up can he remember. corv: has he children mos: bastards some 
dozen or more that he begot on beggars gipsies and jews and blackmoors 
when he was drunk. knew you not that sir tis the common fable. the dwarf 
the fool the eunuch are all his hes the true father of his family in all 
save me: but he has givn them nothing. corv: thats well thats well. art 
sure he does not hear us mos: sure sir why look you credit your own 
sense. shouts in vol.s ear. the pox approach and add to your diseases if 
it would send you hence the sooner sir for your incontinence it hath 
deservd it thoroughly and thoroughly and the plague to boot you may come 
near sir. would you would once close those filthy eyes of yours that 
flow with slime like two frogpits and those same hanging cheeks coverd 
with hide instead of skin nay help sir that look like frozen dishclouts 
set on end corv aloud.: or like an old smoked wall on which the rain ran 
down in streaks mos: excellent sir speak out: you may be louder yet: a 
culverin discharged in his ear would hardly bore it. corv: his nose is 
like a common sewer still running. mos: tis good and what his mouth 
corv: a very draught. mos: o stop it up corv: by no means. mos: pray you 
let me. faith i could stifle him rarely with a pillow as well as any 
woman that should keep him. corv: do as you will: but ill begone. mos: 
be so: it is your presence makes him last so long. corv: i pray you use 
no violence. mos: no sir why why should you be thus scrupulous pray you 
sir corv: nay at your discretion. mos: well good sir begone. corv: i 
will not trouble him now to take my pearl. mos: puh nor your diamond. 
what a needless care is this afflicts you is not all here yours am not i 
here whom you have made your creature that owe my being to you corv: 
grateful mosca thou art my friend my fellow my companion my partner and 
shalt share in all my fortunes. mos: excepting one. corv: whats that 
mos: your gallant wife sir exit corv. now is he gone: we had no other 
means to shoot him hence but this. volp: my divine mosca thou hast today 
outgone thyself. knocking within. whos there i will be troubled with no 
more. prepare me music dances banquets all delights the turk is not more 
sensual in his pleasures than will volpone. exit mos. let me see a pearl 
a diamond plate chequines good mornings purchase why this is better than 
rob churches yet or fat by eating once a month a man. reenter mosca. who 
ist mos: the beauteous lady wouldbe sir. wife to the english knight sir 
politick wouldbe this is the style sir is directed me hath sent to know 
how you have slept tonight and if you would be visited volp: not now: 
some three hours hence mos: i told the squire so much. volp: when i am 
high with mirth and wine then then: fore heaven i wonder at the 
desperate valour of the bold english that they dare let loose their 
wives to all encounters mos: sir this knight had not his name for 
nothing he is politick and knows howeer his wife affect strange airs she 
hath not yet the face to be dishonest: but had she signior corvinos 
wifes face volp: has she so rare a face mos: o sir the wonder the 
blazing star of italy a wench of the first year a beauty ripe as harvest 
whose skin is whiter than a swan all over than silver snow or lilies a 
soft lip would tempt you to eternity of kissing and flesh that melteth 
in the touch to blood bright as your gold and lovely as your gold volp: 
why had not i known this before mos: alas sir myself but yesterday 
discoverd it. volp: how might i see her mos: o not possible shes kept as 
warily as is your gold never does come abroad never takes air but at a 
window. all her looks are sweet as the first grapes or cherries and are 
watchd as near as they are. volp: i must see her. mos: sir there is a 
guard of spies ten thick upon her all his whole household each of which 
is set upon his fellow and have all their charge when he goes out when 
he comes in examined. volp: i will go see her though but at her window. 
mos: in some disguise then. volp: that is true i must maintain mine own 
shape still the same: well think. exeunt. act . scene .. st. marks place 
a retired corner before corvinos house. enter sir politick wouldbe and 
peregrine. sir p: sir to a wise man all the worlds his soil: it is not 
italy nor france nor europe that must bound me if my fates call me 
forth. yet i protest it is no salt desire of seeing countries shifting a 
religion nor any disaffection to the state where i was bred and unto 
which i owe my dearest plots hath brought me out much less that idle 
antique stale grayheaded project of knowing mens minds and manners with 
ulysses but a peculiar humour of my wifes laid for this height of venice 
to observe to quote to learn the language and so forth i hope you travel 
sir with license per: yes. sir p: i dare the safelier converse how long 
sir since you left england per: seven weeks. sir p: so lately you have 
not been with my lord ambassador per: not yet sir. sir p: pray you what 
news sir vents our climate i heard last night a most strange thing 
reported by some of my lords followers and i long to hear how twill be 
seconded. per: what wast sir sir p: marry sir of a raven that should 
build in a ship royal of the kings. per aside.: this fellow does he gull 
me trow or is gulld your name sir. sir p: my name is politick wouldbe. 
per aside.: o that speaks him. a knight sir sir p: a poor knight sir. 
per: your lady lies here in venice for intelligence of tires and 
fashions and behaviour among the courtezans the fine lady wouldbe sir p: 
yes sir the spider and the bee ofttimes suck from one flower. per: good 
sir politick i cry you mercy i have heard much of you: tis true sir of 
your raven. sir p: on your knowledge per: yes and your lions whelping in 
the tower. sir p: another whelp per: another sir. sir p: now heaven what 
prodigies be these the fires at berwick and the new star these things 
concurring strange and full of omen saw you those meteors per: i did 
sir. sir p: fearful pray you sir confirm me were there three porpoises 
seen above the bridge as they give out per: six and a sturgeon sir. sir 
p: i am astonishd. per: nay sir be not so ill tell you a greater prodigy 
than these. sir p: what should these things portend per: the very day 
let me be sure that i put forth from london there was a whale discoverd 
in the river as high as woolwich that had waited there few know how many 
months for the subversion of the stode fleet. sir p: ist possible 
believe it twas either sent from spain or the archdukes: spinolas whale 
upon my life my credit will they not leave these projects worthy sir 
some other news. per: faith stone the fool is dead and they do lack a 
tavern fool extremely. sir p: is mass stone dead per: hes dead sir why i 
hope you thought him not immortal aside. o this knight were he well 
known would be a precious thing to fit our english stage: he that should 
write but such a fellow should be thought to feign extremely if not 
maliciously. sir p: stone dead per: dead. lord how deeply sir you 
apprehend it he was no kinsman to you sir p: that i know of. well that 
same fellow was an unknown fool. per: and yet you knew him it seems sir 
p: i did so. sir i knew him one of the most dangerous heads living 
within the state and so i held him. per: indeed sir sir p: while he 
lived in action. he has received weekly intelligence upon my knowledge 
out of the low countries for all parts of the world in cabbages and 
those dispensed again to ambassadors in oranges muskmelons apricocks 
lemons pomecitrons and suchlike: sometimes in colchester oysters and 
your selsey cockles. per: you make me wonder. sir p: sir upon my 
knowledge. nay ive observed him at your public ordinary take his 
advertisement from a traveller a conceald statesman in a trencher of 
meat and instantly before the meal was done convey an answer in a 
toothpick. per: strange how could this be sir sir p: why the meat was 
cut so like his character and so laid as he must easily read the cipher. 
per: i have heard he could not read sir. sir p: so twas given out in 
policy by those that did employ him: but he could read and had your 
languages and tot as sound a noddle per: i have heard sir that your 
baboons were spies and that they were a kind of subtle nation near to 
china: sir p: ay ay your mamuluchi. faith they had their hand in a 
french plot or two but they were so extremely given to women as they 
made discovery of all: yet i had my advices here on wednesday last. from 
one of their own coat they were returnd made their relations as the 
fashion is and now stand fair for fresh employment. per: heart aside. 
this sir pol will be ignorant of nothing. it seems sir you know all sir 
p: not all sir but i have some general notions. i do love to note and to 
observe: though i live out free from the active torrent yet id mark the 
currents and the passages of things for mine own private use and know 
the ebbs and flows of state. per: believe it sir i hold myself in no 
small tie unto my fortunes for casting me thus luckily upon you whose 
knowledge if your bounty equal it may do me great assistance in 
instruction for my behaviour and my bearing which is yet so rude and 
raw. sir p: why came you forth empty of rules for travel per: faith i 
had some common ones from out that vulgar grammar which he that cried 
italian to me taught me. sir p: why this it is that spoils all our brave 
bloods trusting our hopeful gentry unto pedants fellows of outside and 
mere bark. you seem to be a gentleman of ingenuous race: i not profess 
it but my fate hath been to be where i have been consulted with in this 
high kind touching some great mens sons persons of blood and honour. 
enter mosca and nano disguised followed by persons with materials for 
erecting a stage. per: who be these sir mos: under that window there t 
must be. the same. sir p: fellows to mount a bank. did your instructor 
in the dear tongues never discourse to you of the italian mountebanks 
per: yes sir. sir p: why here shall you see one. per: they are 
quacksalvers fellows that live by venting oils and drugs. sir p: was 
that the character he gave you of them per: as i remember. sir p: pity 
his ignorance. they are the only knowing men of europe great general 
scholars excellent physicians most admired statesmen profest favourites 
and cabinet counsellors to the greatest princes the only languaged men 
of all the world per: and i have heard they are most lewd impostors made 
all of terms and shreds no less beliers of great mens favours than their 
own vile medcines which they will utter upon monstrous oaths: selling 
that drug for twopence ere they part which they have valued at twelve 
crowns before. sir p: sir calumnies are answerd best with silence. 
yourself shall judge. who is it mounts my friends mos: scoto of mantua 
sir. sir p: ist he nay then ill proudly promise sir you shall behold 
another man than has been phantsied to you. i wonder yet that he should 
mount his bank here in this nook that has been wont tappear in face of 
the piazza here he comes. enter volpone disguised as a mountebank doctor 
and followed by a crowd of people. volp to nano.: mount zany. mob: 
follow follow follow follow sir p: see how the people follow him hes a 
man may write ten thousand crowns in bank here. note volpone mounts the 
stage. mark but his gesture: i do use to observe the state he keeps in 
getting up. per: tis worth it sir. volp: most noble gentlemen and my 
worthy patrons it may seem strange that i your scoto mantuano who was 
ever wont to fix my bank in face of the public piazza near the shelter 
of the portico to the procuratia should now after eight months absence 
from this illustrious city of venice humbly retire myself into an 
obscure nook of the piazza. sir p: did not i now object the same per: 
peace sir. volp: let me tell you: i am not as your lombard proverb saith 
cold on my feet or content to part with my commodities at a cheaper rate 
than i accustomed: look not for it. nor that the calumnious reports of 
that impudent detractor and shame to our profession alessandro buttone i 
mean who gave out in public i was condemnd a sforzato to the galleys for 
poisoning the cardinal bembos cook hath at all attached much less 
dejected me. no no worthy gentlemen to tell you true i cannot endure to 
see the rabble of these ground ciarlitani that spread their cloaks on 
the pavement as if they meant to do feats of activity and then come in 
lamely with their mouldy tales out of boccacio like stale tabarine the 
fabulist: some of them discoursing their travels and of their tedious 
captivity in the turks galleys when indeed were the truth known they 
were the christians galleys where very temperately they eat bread and 
drunk water as a wholesome penance enjoined them by their confessors for 
base pilferies. sir p: note but his bearing and contempt of these. volp: 
these turdyfacynastypatylousyfartical rogues with one poor groatsworth 
of unprepared antimony finely wrapt up in several scartoccios are able 
very well to kill their twenty a week and play yet these meagre starved 
spirits who have half stopt the organs of their minds with earthy 
oppilations want not their favourers among your shrivelld salladeating 
artizans who are overjoyed that they may have their halfperth of physic 
though it purge them into another world it makes no matter. sir p: 
excellent have you heard better language sir volp: well let them go. and 
gentlemen honourable gentlemen know that for this time our bank being 
thus removed from the clamours of the canaglia shall be the scene of 
pleasure and delight for i have nothing to sell little or nothing to 
sell. sir p: i told you sir his end. per: you did so sir. volp: i 
protest i and my six servants are not able to make of this precious 
liquor so fast as it is fetchd away from my lodging by gentlemen of your 
city strangers of the terrafirma worshipful merchants ay and senators 
too: who ever since my arrival have detained me to their uses by their 
splendidous liberalities. and worthily for what avails your rich man to 
have his magazines stuft with moscadelli or of the purest grape when his 
physicians prescribe him on pain of death to drink nothing but water 
cocted with aniseeds o health health the blessing of the rich the riches 
of the poor who can buy thee at too dear a rate since there is no 
enjoying this world without thee be not then so sparing of your purses 
honourable gentlemen as to abridge the natural course of life per: you 
see his end. sir p: ay ist not good volp: for when a humid flux or 
catarrh by the mutability of air falls from your head into an arm or 
shoulder or any other part take you a ducat or your chequin of gold and 
apply to the place affected: see what good effect it can work. no no tis 
this blessed unguento this rare extraction that hath only power to 
disperse all malignant humours that proceed either of hot cold moist or 
windy causes per: i would he had put in dry too. sir p: pray you 
observe. volp: to fortify the most indigest and crude stomach ay were it 
of one that through extreme weakness vomited blood applying only a warm 
napkin to the place after the unction and fricace for the vertigine in 
the head putting but a drop into your nostrils likewise behind the ears 
a most sovereign and approved remedy. the mal caduco cramps convulsions 
paralysies epilepsies tremorcordia retired nerves ill vapours of the 
spleen stopping of the liver the stone the strangury hernia ventosa 
iliaca passio stops a disenteria immediately easeth the torsion of the 
small guts: and cures melancholia hypocondriaca being taken and applied 
according to my printed receipt. pointing to his bill and his vial. for 
this is the physician this the medicine this counsels this cures this 
gives the direction this works the effect and in sum both together may 
be termed an abstract of the theorick and practick in the aesculapian 
art. twill cost you eight crowns. and zan fritada prithee sing a verse 
extempore in honour of it. sir p: how do you like him sir per: most 
strangely i sir p: is not his language rare per: but alchemy i never 
heard the like: or broughtons books. nano sings.: had old hippocrates or 
galen that to their books put medcines all in but known this secret they 
had never of which they will be guilty ever been murderers of so much 
paper or wasted many a hurtless taper no indian drug had eer been famed 
tabacco sassafras not named ne yet of guacum one small stick sir nor 
raymund lullys great elixir. ne had been known the danish gonswart or 
paracelsus with his longsword. per: all this yet will not do eight 
crowns is high. volp: no more. gentlemen if i had but time to discourse 
to you the miraculous effects of this my oil surnamed oglio del scoto 
with the countless catalogue of those i have cured of the aforesaid and 
many more diseases the pattents and privileges of all the princes and 
commonwealths of christendom or but the depositions of those that 
appeared on my part before the signiory of the sanita and most learned 
college of physicians where i was authorised upon notice taken of the 
admirable virtues of my medicaments and mine own excellency in matter of 
rare and unknown secrets not only to disperse them publicly in this 
famous city but in all the territories that happily joy under the 
government of the most pious and magnificent states of italy. but may 
some other gallant fellow say o there be divers that make profession to 
have as good and as experimented receipts as yours: indeed very many 
have assayed like apes in imitation of that which is really and 
essentially in me to make of this oil bestowed great cost in furnaces 
stills alembecks continual fires and preparation of the ingredients as 
indeed there goes to it six hundred several simples besides some 
quantity of human fat for the conglutination which we buy of the 
anatomists but when these practitioners come to the last decoction blow 
blow puff puff and all flies in fumo: ha ha ha poor wretches i rather 
pity their folly and indiscretion than their loss of time and money for 
these may be recovered by industry: but to be a fool born is a disease 
incurable. for myself i always from my youth have endeavoured to get the 
rarest secrets and book them either in exchange or for money i spared 
nor cost nor labour where any thing was worthy to be learned. and 
gentlemen honourable gentlemen i will undertake by virtue of chemical 
art out of the honourable hat that covers your head to extract the four 
elements that is to say the fire air water and earth and return you your 
felt without burn or stain. for whilst others have been at the balloo i 
have been at my book and am now past the craggy paths of study and come 
to the flowery plains of honour and reputation. sir p: i do assure you 
sir that is his aim. volp: but to our price per: and that withal sir 
pol. volp: you all know honourable gentlemen i never valued this ampulla 
or vial at less than eight crowns but for this time i am content to be 
deprived of it for six six crowns is the price and less in courtesy i 
know you cannot offer me take it or leave it howsoever both it and i am 
at your service. i ask you not as the value of the thing for then i 
should demand of you a thousand crowns so the cardinals montalto fernese 
the great duke of tuscany my gossip with divers other princes have given 
me but i despise money. only to shew my affection to you honourable 
gentlemen and your illustrious state here i have neglected the messages 
of these princes mine own offices framed my journey hither only to 
present you with the fruits of my travels. tune your voices once more to 
the touch of your instruments and give the honourable assembly some 
delightful recreation. per: what monstrous and most painful circumstance 
is here to get some three or four gazettes some threepence in the whole 
for that twill come to. nano sings.: you that would last long list to my 
song make no more coil but buy of this oil. would you be ever fair and 
young stout of teeth and strong of tongue tart of palate quick of ear 
sharp of sight of nostril clear moist of hand and light of foot or i 
will come nearer tot would you live free from all diseases do the act 
your mistress pleases yet fright all aches from your bones heres a 
medcine for the nones. volp: well i am in a humour at this time to make 
a present of the small quantity my coffer contains to the rich in 
courtesy and to the poor for gods sake. wherefore now mark: i askd you 
six crowns and six crowns at other times you have paid me you shall not 
give me six crowns nor five nor four nor three nor two nor one nor half 
a ducat no nor a moccinigo. sixpence it will cost you or six hundred 
pound expect no lower price for by the banner of my front i will not 
bate a bagatine that i will have only a pledge of your loves to carry 
something from amongst you to shew i am not contemnd by you. therefore 
now toss your handkerchiefs cheerfully cheerfully and be advertised that 
the first heroic spirit that deignes to grace me with a handkerchief i 
will give it a little remembrance of something beside shall please it 
better than if i had presented it with a double pistolet. per: will you 
be that heroic spark sir pol celia at a window above throws down her 
handkerchief. o see the window has prevented you. volp: lady i kiss your 
bounty and for this timely grace you have done your poor scoto of mantua 
i will return you over and above my oil a secret of that high and 
inestimable nature shall make you for ever enamourd on that minute 
wherein your eye first descended on so mean yet not altogether to be 
despised an object. here is a powder conceald in this paper of which if 
i should speak to the worth nine thousand volumes were but as one page 
that page as a line that line as a word so short is this pilgrimage of 
man which some call life to the expressing of it. would i reflect on the 
price why the whole world is but as an empire that empire as a province 
that province as a bank that bank as a private purse to the purchase of 
it. i will only tell you it is the powder that made venus a goddess 
given her by apollo that kept her perpetually young cleard her wrinkles 
firmd her gums filld her skin colourd her hair from her derivd to helen 
and at the sack of troy unfortunately lost: till now in this our age it 
was as happily recovered by a studious antiquary out of some ruins of 
asia who sent a moiety of it to the court of france but much 
sophisticated wherewith the ladies there now colour their hair. the rest 
at this present remains with me extracted to a quintessence: so that 
whereever it but touches in youth it perpetually preserves in age 
restores the complexion seats your teeth did they dance like virginal 
jacks firm as a wall makes them white as ivory that were black as enter 
corvino. cor: spight o the devil and my shame come down here come down 
no house but mine to make your scene signior flaminio will you down sir 
down what is my wife your franciscina sir no windows on the whole piazza 
here to make your properties but mine but mine beats away volpone nano 
etc. heart ere tomorrow i shall be newchristend and calld the pantalone 
di besogniosi about the town. per: what should this mean sir pol sir p: 
some trick of state believe it. i will home. per: it may be some design 
on you: sir p: i know not. ill stand upon my guard. per: it is your best 
sir. sir p: this three weeks all my advices all my letters they have 
been intercepted. per: indeed sir best have a care. sir p: nay so i 
will. per: this knight i may not lose him for my mirth till night. 
exeunt. scene .. a room in volpones house. enter volpone and mosca. 
volp: o i am wounded mos: where sir volp: not without those blows were 
nothing: i could bear them ever. but angry cupid bolting from her eyes 
hath shot himself into me like a flame where now he flings about his 
burning heat as in a furnace an ambitious fire whose vent is stopt. the 
fight is all within me. i cannot live except thou help me mosca my liver 
melts and i without the hope of some soft air from her refreshing breath 
am but a heap of cinders. mos: las good sir would you had never seen her 
volp: nay would thou hadst never told me of her mos: sir tis true i do 
confess i was unfortunate and you unhappy: but im bound in conscience no 
less than duty to effect my best to your release of torment and i will 
sir. volp: dear mosca shall i hope mos: sir more than dear i will not 
bid you to dispair of aught within a human compass. volp: o there spoke 
my better angel. mosca take my keys gold plate and jewels alls at thy 
devotion employ them how thou wilt nay coin me too: so thou in this but 
crown my longings mosca. mos: use but your patience. volp: so i have. 
mos: i doubt not to bring success to your desires. volp: nay then i not 
repent me of my late disguise. mos: if you can horn him sir you need 
not. volp: true: besides i never meant him for my heir. is not the 
colour of my beard and eyebrows to make me known mos: no jot. volp: i 
did it well. mos: so well would i could follow you in mine with half the 
happiness aside. and yet i would escape your epilogue. volp: but were 
they gulld with a belief that i was scoto mos: sir scoto himself could 
hardly have distinguishd i have not time to flatter you now well part 
and as i prosper so applaud my art. exeunt. scene .. a room in corvinos 
house. enter corvino with his sword in his hand dragging in celia. corv: 
death of mine honour with the citys fool a juggling toothdrawing prating 
mountebank and at a public window where whilst he with his straind 
action and his dole of faces to his druglecture draws your itching ears 
a crew of old unmarried noted letchers stood leering up like satyrs and 
you smile most graciously and fan your favours forth to give your hot 
spectators satisfaction what was your mountebank their call their 
whistle or were you enamourd on his copper rings his saffron jewel with 
the toadstone int or his embroiderd suit with the copestitch made of a 
hersecloth or his old tiltfeather or his starchd beard well you shall 
have him yes he shall come home and minister unto you the fricace for 
the mother. or let me see i think youd rather mount would you not mount 
why if youll mount you may yes truly you may: and so you may be seen 
down to the foot. get you a cittern lady vanity and be a dealer with the 
virtuous man make one: ill but protest myself a cuckold and save your 
dowry. im a dutchman i for if you thought me an italian you would be 
damnd ere you did this you whore thoudst tremble to imagine that the 
murder of father mother brother all thy race should follow as the 
subject of my justice. cel: good sir have pacience. corv: what couldst 
thou propose less to thyself than in this heat of wrath and stung with 
my dishonour i should strike this steel into thee with as many stabs as 
thou wert gazd upon with goatish eyes cel: alas sir be appeasd i could 
not think my being at the window should more now move your impatience 
than at other times. corv: no not to seek and entertain a parley with a 
known knave before a multitude you were an actor with your handkerchief 
which he most sweetly kist in the receipt and might no doubt return it 
with a letter and point the place where you might meet: your sisters 
your mothers or your aunts might serve the turn. cel: why dear sir when 
do i make these excuses or ever stir abroad but to the church and that 
so seldom corv: well it shall be less and thy restraint before was 
liberty to what i now decree: and therefore mark me. first i will have 
this bawdy light dammd up and tillt be done some two or three yards off 
ill chalk a line: oer which if thou but chance to set thy desperate foot 
more hell more horror more wild remorseless rage shall seize on thee 
than on a conjurer that had heedless left his circles safety ere his 
devil was laid. then heres a lock which i will hang upon thee and now i 
think ont i will keep thee backwards thy lodging shall be backwards thy 
walks backwards thy prospect all be backwards and no pleasure that thou 
shalt know but backwards: nay since you force my honest nature know it 
is your own being too open makes me use you thus: since you will not 
contain your subtle nostrils in a sweet room but they must snuff the air 
of rank and sweaty passengers. knocking within. one knocks. away and be 
not seen pain of thy life nor look toward the window: if thou dost nay 
stay hear this let me not prosper whore but i will make thee an anatomy 
dissect thee mine own self and read a lecture upon thee to the city and 
in public. away exit celia. enter servant. whos there serv: tis signior 
mosca sir. corv: let him come in. exit servant. his masters dead: theres 
yet some good to help the bad. enter mosca. my mosca welcome i guess 
your news. mos: i fear you cannot sir. corv: ist not his death mos: 
rather the contrary. corv: not his recovery mos: yes sir corv: i am 
cursd i am bewitchd my crosses meet to vex me. how how how how mos: why 
sir with scotos oil corbaccio and voltore brought of it whilst i was 
busy in an inner room corv: death that damnd mountebank but for the law 
now i could kill the rascal: it cannot be his oil should have that 
virtue. have not i known him a common rogue come fidling in to the 
osteria with a tumbling whore and when he has done all his forced tricks 
been glad of a poor spoonful of dead wine with flies int it cannot be. 
all his ingredients are a sheeps gall a roasted bitchs marrow some few 
sod earwigs pounded caterpillars a little capons grease and fasting 
spittle: i know them to a dram. mos: i know not sir but some ont there 
they pourd into his ears some in his nostrils and recoverd him applying 
but the fricace. corv: pox o that fricace. mos: and since to seem the 
more officious and flattring of his health there they have had at 
extreme fees the college of physicians consulting on him how they might 
restore him where one would have a cataplasm of spices another a flayd 
ape clappd to his breast a third would have it a dog a fourth an oil 
with wild cats skins: at last they all resolved that to preserve him was 
no other means but some young woman must be straight sought out lusty 
and full of juice to sleep by him and to this service most unhappily and 
most unwillingly am i now employd which here i thought to preacquaint 
you with for your advice since it concerns you most because i would not 
do that thing might cross your ends on whom i have my whole dependance 
sir: yet if i do it not they may delate my slackness to my patron work 
me out of his opinion and there all your hopes ventures or whatsoever 
are all frustrate i do but tell you sir. besides they are all now 
striving who shall first present him therefore i could entreat you 
briefly conclude somewhat prevent them if you can. corv: death to my 
hopes this is my villainous fortune best to hire some common courtezan. 
mos: ay i thought on that sir but they are all so subtle full of art and 
age again doting and flexible so as i cannot tell we may perchance light 
on a quean may cheat us all. corv: tis true. mos: no no: it must be one 
that has no tricks sir some simple thing a creature made unto it some 
wench you may command. have you no kinswoman odso think think think 
think think think think sir. one o the doctors offerd there his 
daughter. corv: how mos: yes signior lupo the physician. corv: his 
daughter mos: and a virgin sir. why alas he knows the state ofs body 
what it is that nought can warm his blood sir but a fever nor any 
incantation raise his spirit: a long forgetfulness hath seized that 
part. besides sir who shall know it some one or two corv: i prithee give 
me leave. walks aside. if any man but i had had this luck the thing int 
self i know is nothing wherefore should not i as well command my blood 
and my affections as this dull doctor in the point of honour the cases 
are all one of wife and daughter. mos aside.: i hear him coming. corv: 
she shall dot: tis done. slight if this doctor who is not engaged unless 
t be for his counsel which is nothing offer his daughter what should i 
that am so deeply in i will prevent him: wretch covetous wretch mosca i 
have determined. mos: how sir corv: well make all sure. the party you 
wot of shall be mine own wife mosca. mos: sir the thing but that i would 
not seem to counsel you i should have motiond to you at the first: and 
make your count you have cut all their throats. why tis directly taking 
a possession and in his next fit we may let him go. tis but to pull the 
pillow from his head and he is throttled: it had been done before but 
for your scrupulous doubts. corv: ay a plague ont my conscience fools my 
wit well ill be brief and so be thou lest they should be before us: go 
home prepare him tell him with what zeal and willingness i do it swear 
it was on the first hearing as thou mayst do truly mine own free motion. 
mos: sir i warrant you ill so possess him with it that the rest of his 
starvd clients shall be banishd all and only you received. but come not 
sir until i send for i have something else to ripen for your good you 
must not knowt. corv: but do not you forget to send now. mos: fear not. 
exit. corv: where are you wife my celia wife reenter celia. what 
blubbering come dry those tears. i think thou thoughtst me in earnest ha 
by this light i talkd so but to try thee: methinks the lightness of the 
occasion should have confirmd thee. come i am not jealous. cel: no corv: 
faith i am not i nor never was it is a poor unprofitable humour. do not 
i know if women have a will theyll do gainst all the watches of the 
world and that the feircest spies are tamed with gold tut i am confident 
in thee thou shalt seet and see ill give thee cause too to believe it. 
come kiss me. go and make thee ready straight in all thy best attire thy 
choicest jewels put them all on and with them thy best looks: we are 
invited to a solemn feast at old volpones where it shall appear how far 
i am free from jealousy or fear. exeunt. act . scene .. a street. enter 
mosca. mos: i fear i shall begin to grow in love with my dear self and 
my most prosperous parts they do so spring and burgeon i can feel a 
whimsy in my blood: i know not how success hath made me wanton. i could 
skip out of my skin now like a subtle snake i am so limber. o your 
parasite is a most precious thing dropt from above not bred mongst clods 
and clodpoles here on earth. i muse the mystery was not made a science 
it is so liberally profest almost all the wise world is little else in 
nature but parasites or subparasites. and yet i mean not those that have 
your bare townart to know whos fit to feed them have no house no family 
no care and therefore mould tales for mens ears to bait that sense or 
get kitcheninvention and some stale receipts to please the belly and the 
groin nor those with their court dogtricks that can fawn and fleer make 
their revenue out of legs and faces echo my lord and lick away a moth: 
but your fine elegant rascal that can rise and stoop almost together 
like an arrow shoot through the air as nimbly as a star turn short as 
doth a swallow and be here and there and here and yonder all at once 
present to any humour all occasion and change a visor swifter than a 
thought this is the creature had the art born with him toils not to 
learn it but doth practise it out of most excellent nature: and such 
sparks are the true parasites others but their zanis. enter bonario. 
mos: whos this bonario old corbaccios son the person i was bound to 
seek. fair sir you are happily met. bon: that cannot be by thee. mos: 
why sir bon: nay pray thee know thy way and leave me: i would be loth to 
interchange discourse with such a mate as thou art mos: courteous sir 
scorn not my poverty. bon: not i by heaven but thou shalt give me leave 
to hate thy baseness. mos: baseness bon: ay answer me is not thy sloth 
sufficient argument thy flattery thy means of feeding mos: heaven be 
good to me these imputations are too common sir and easily stuck on 
virtue when shes poor. you are unequal to me and however your sentence 
may be righteous yet you are not that ere you know me thus proceed in 
censure: st. mark bear witness gainst you tis inhuman. weeps. bon 
aside.: what does he weep the sign is soft and good i do repent me that 
i was so harsh. mos: tis true that swayd by strong necessity i am 
enforced to eat my careful bread with too much obsequy tis true beside 
that i am fain to spin mine own poor raiment out of my mere observance 
being not born to a free fortune: but that i have done base offices in 
rending friends asunder dividing families betraying counsels whispering 
false lies or mining men with praises traind their credulity with 
perjuries corrupted chastity or am in love with mine own tender ease but 
would not rather prove the most rugged and laborious course that might 
redeem my present estimation let me here perish in all hope of goodness. 
bon aside.: this cannot be a personated passion. i was to blame so to 
mistake thy nature prithee forgive me: and speak out thy business. mos: 
sir it concerns you and though i may seem at first to make a main 
offence in manners and in my gratitude unto my master yet for the pure 
love which i bear all right and hatred of the wrong i must reveal it. 
this very hour your father is in purpose to disinherit you bon: how mos: 
and thrust you forth as a mere stranger to his blood tis true sir: the 
work no way engageth me but as i claim an interest in the general state 
of goodness and true virtue which i hear to abound in you: and for which 
mere respect without a second aim sir i have done it. bon: this tale 
hath lost thee much of the late trust thou hadst with me it is 
impossible: i know not how to lend it any thought my father should be so 
unnatural. mos: it is a confidence that well becomes your piety and 
formd no doubt it is from your own simple innocence: which makes your 
wrong more monstrous and abhorrd. but sir i now will tell you more. this 
very minute it is or will be doing and if you shall be but pleasd to go 
with me ill bring you i dare not say where you shall see but where your 
ear shall be a witness of the deed hear yourself written bastard and 
profest the common issue of the earth. bon: i am amazed mos: sir if i do 
it not draw your just sword and score your vengeance on my front and 
face mark me your villain: you have too much wrong and i do suffer for 
you sir. my heart weeps blood in anguish bon: lead i follow thee. 
exeunt. scene .. a room in volpones house. enter volpone. volp: mosca 
stays long methinks. bring forth your sports and help to make the 
wretched time more sweet. enter nano androgyno and castrone. nan: dwarf 
fool and eunuch well met here we be. a question it were now whether of 
us three being all the known delicates of a rich man in pleasing him 
claim the precedency can cas: i claim for myself. and: and so doth the 
fool. nan: tis foolish indeed: let me set you both to school. first for 
your dwarf hes little and witty and every thing as it is little is 
pretty else why do men say to a creature of my shape so soon as they see 
him its a pretty little ape and why a pretty ape but for pleasing 
imitation of greater mens actions in a ridiculous fashion beside this 
feat body of mine doth not crave half the meat drink and cloth one of 
your bulks will have. admit your fools face be the mother of laughter 
yet for his brain it must always come after: and though that do feed him 
tis a pitiful case his body is beholding to such a bad face. knocking 
within. volp: whos there my couch away look nano see: exe. and. and cas. 
give me my caps first go enquire. exit nano. now cupid send it be mosca 
and with fair return nan within.: it is the beauteous madam volp: 
wouldbe is it nan: the same. volp: now torment on me squire her in for 
she will enter or dwell here for ever: nay quickly. retires to his 
couch. that my fit were past i fear a second hell too that my lothing 
this will quite expel my appetite to the other: would she were taking 
now her tedious leave. lord how it threats me what i am to suffer 
reenter nano with lady politick wouldbe. lady p: i thank you good sir. 
pray you signify unto your patron i am here. this band shews not my neck 
enough. i trouble you sir let me request you bid one of my women come 
hither to me. in good faith i am drest most favorably today it is no 
matter: tis well enough. enter waitingwoman. look see these petulant 
things how they have done this volp aside.: i do feel the fever entering 
in at mine ears o for a charm to fright it hence. lady p: come nearer: 
is this curl in his right place or this why is this higher then all the 
rest you have not washd your eyes yet or do they not stand even in your 
head where is your fellow call her. exit woman. nan: now st. mark 
deliver us anon she will beat her women because her nose is red. reenter 
with woman. lady p: i pray you view this tire forsooth are all things 
apt or no wom: one hair a little here sticks out forsooth. lady p: doest 
so forsooth and where was your dear sight when it did so forsooth what 
now birdeyed and you too pray you both approach and mend it. now by that 
light i muse you are not ashamed i that have preachd these things so oft 
unto you read you the principles argued all the grounds disputed every 
fitness every grace calld you to counsel of so frequent dressings nan 
aside.: more carefully than of your fame or honour. lady p: made you 
acquainted what an ample dowry the knowledge of these things would be 
unto you able alone to get you noble husbands at your return: and you 
thus to neglect it besides you seeing what a curious nation the italians 
are what will they say of me the english lady cannot dress herself. 
heres a fine imputation to our country: well go your ways and stay in 
the next room. this fucus was too course too its no matter. goodsir you 
will give them entertainment exeunt nano and waitingwomen. volp: the 
storm comes toward me. lady p goes to the couch.: how does my volpone 
volp: troubled with noise i cannot sleep i dreamt that a strange fury 
enterd now my house and with the dreadful tempest of her breath did 
cleave my roof asunder. lady p: believe me and i had the most fearful 
dream could i remembert volp aside.: out on my fate i have given her the 
occasion how to torment me: she will tell me hers. lady p: me thought 
the golden mediocrity polite and delicate volp: o if you do love me no 
more i sweat and suffer at the mention of any dream: feel how i tremble 
yet. lady p: alas good soul the passion of the heart. seedpearl were 
good now boild with syrup of apples tincture of gold and coral 
citronpills your elicampane root myrobalanes volp aside.: ah me i have 
taen a grasshopper by the wing lady p: burnt silk and amber: you have 
muscadel good in the house volp: you will not drink and part lady p: no 
fear not that. i doubt we shall not get some english saffron half a dram 
would serve your sixteen cloves a little musk dried mints bugloss and 
barleymeal volp aside.: shes in again before i faind diseases now i have 
one. lady p: and these applied with a right scarlet cloth. volp aside.: 
another flood of words a very torrent lady p: shall i sir make you a 
poultice volp: no no no i am very well: you need prescribe no more. lady 
p: i have a little studied physic but now im all for music save in the 
forenoons an hour or two for painting. i would have a lady indeed to 
have all letters and arts be able to discourse to write to paint but 
principal as plato holds your music and so does wise pythagoras i take 
it is your true rapture: when there is concent in face in voice and 
clothes: and is indeed our sexs chiefest ornament. volp: the poet as old 
in time as plato and as knowing says that your highest female grace is 
silence. lady p: which of your poets petrarch or tasso or dante guarini 
ariosto aretine cieco di hadria i have read them all. volp aside.: is 
every thing a cause to my distruction lady p: i think i have two or 
three of them about me. volp aside.: the sun the sea will sooner both 
stand still then her eternal tongue nothing can scape it. lady p: heres 
pastor fido volp aside.: profess obstinate silence thats now my safest. 
lady p: all our english writers i mean such as are happy in the italian 
will deign to steal out of this author mainly: almost as much as from 
montagnie he has so modern and facile a vein fitting the time and 
catching the courtear your petrarch is more passionate yet he in days of 
sonetting trusted them with much: dante is hard and few can understand 
him. but for a desperate wit theres aretine only his pictures are a 
little obscene you mark me not. volp: alas my mind is perturbd. lady p: 
why in such cases we must cure ourselves make use of our philosophy 
volp: oh me lady p: and as we find our passions do rebel encounter them 
with reason or divert them by giving scope unto some other humour of 
lesser danger: as in politic bodies theres nothing more doth overwhelm 
the judgment and cloud the understanding than too much settling and 
fixing and as twere subsiding upon one object. for the incorporating of 
these same outward things into that part which we call mental leaves 
some certain faeces that stop the organs and as plato says assassinate 
our knowledge. volp aside.: now the spirit of patience help me lady p: 
come in faith i must visit you more a days and make you well: laugh and 
be lusty. volp aside.: my good angel save me lady p: there was but one 
sole man in all the world with whom i eer could sympathise and he would 
lie you often three four hours together to hear me speak and be 
sometimes so rapt as he would answer me quite from the purpose like you 
and you are like him just. ill discourse ant be but only sir to bring 
you asleep how we did spend our time and loves together for some six 
years. volp: oh oh oh oh oh oh lady p: for we were coaetanei and brought 
up volp: some power some fate some fortune rescue me enter mosca. mos: 
god save you madam lady p: good sir. volp: mosca welcome welcome to my 
redemption. mos: why sir volp: oh rid me of this my torture quickly 
there my madam with the everlasting voice: the bells in time of 
pestilence neer made like noise or were in that perpetual motion the 
cockpit comes not near it. all my house but now steamd like a bath with 
her thick breath. a lawyer could not have been heard nor scarce another 
woman such a hail of words she has let fall. for hells sake rid her 
hence. mos: has she presented volp: o i do not care ill take her absence 
upon any price with any loss. mos: madam lady p: i have brought your 
patron a toy a cap here of mine own work. mos: tis well. i had forgot to 
tell you i saw your knight where you would little think it. lady p: 
where mos: marry where yet if you make haste you may apprehend rowing 
upon the water in a gondole with the most cunning courtezan of venice. 
lady p: ist true mos: pursue them and believe your eyes leave me to make 
your gift. exit lady p. hastily. i knew twould take: for lightly they 
that use themselves most license are still most jealous. volp: mosca 
hearty thanks for thy quick fiction and delivery of me. now to my hopes 
what sayst thou reenter lady p. wouldbe. lady p: but do you hear sir 
volp: again i fear a paroxysm. lady p: which way rowd they together mos: 
toward the rialto. lady p: i pray you lend me your dwarf. mos: i pray 
you take him. exit lady p. your hopes sir are like happy blossoms fair 
and promise timely fruit if you will stay but the maturing keep you at 
your couch corbaccio will arrive straight with the will when he is gone 
ill tell you more. exit. volp: my blood my spirits are returnd i am 
alive: and like your wanton gamester at primero whose thought had 
whisperd to him not go less methinks i lie and draw for an encounter. 
the scene closes upon volpone. scene . the passage leading to volpones 
chamber. enter mosca and bonario. mos: sir here conceald shews him a 
closet. you may here all. but pray you have patience sir knocking 
within. the sames your father knocks: i am compelld to leave you. exit. 
bon: do so. yet cannot my thought imagine this a truth. goes into the 
closet. scene .. another part of the same. enter mosca and corvino celia 
following. mos: death on me you are come too soon what meant you did not 
i say i would send corv: yes but i feard you might forget it and then 
they prevent us. mos aside.: prevent did eer man haste so for his horns 
a courtier would not ply it so for a place. well now theres no helping 
it stay here ill presently return. exit. corv: where are you celia you 
know not wherefore i have brought you hither cel: not well except you 
told me. corv: now i will: hark hither. exeunt. scene .. a closet 
opening into a gallery. enter mosca and bonario. mos: sir your father 
hath sent word it will be half an hour ere he come and therefore if you 
please to walk the while into that gallery at the upper end there are 
some books to entertain the time: and ill take care no man shall come 
unto you sir. bon: yes i will stay there. aside. i do doubt this fellow. 
exit. mos looking after him.: there he is far enough he can hear 
nothing: and for his father i can keep him off. exit. scene .. volpones 
chamber. volpone on his couch. mosca sitting by him. enter corvino 
forcing in celia. corv: nay now there is no starting back and therefore 
resolve upon it: i have so decreed. it must be done. nor would i movet 
afore because i would avoid all shifts and tricks that might deny me. 
cel: sir let me beseech you affect not these strange trials if you doubt 
my chastity why lock me up for ever: make me the heir of darkness. let 
me live where i may please your fears if not your trust. corv: believe 
it i have no such humour i. all that i speak i mean yet im not mad nor 
hornmad see you go to shew yourself obedient and a wife. cel: o heaven 
corv: i say it do so. cel: was this the train corv: ive told you reasons 
what the physicians have set down how much it may concern me what my 
engagements are my means and the necessity of those means for my 
recovery: wherefore if you be loyal and mine be won respect my venture. 
cel: before your honour corv: honour tut a breath: theres no such thing 
in nature: a mere term invented to awe fools. what is my gold the worse 
for touching clothes for being lookd on why this is no more. an old 
decrepit wretch that has no sense no sinew takes his meat with others 
fingers only knows to gape when you do scald his gums a voice a shadow 
and what can this man hurt you cel aside.: lord what spirit is this hath 
enterd him corv: and for your fame thats such a jig as if i would go 
tell it cry it on the piazza who shall know it but he that cannot speak 
it and this fellow whose lips are in my pocket save yourself if youll 
proclaimt you may i know no other shall come to know it. cel: are heaven 
and saints then nothing will they be blind or stupid corv: how cel: good 
sir be jealous still emulate them and think what hate they burn with 
toward every sin. corv: i grant you: if i thought it were a sin i would 
not urge you. should i offer this to some young frenchman or hot tuscan 
blood that had read aretine connd all his prints knew every quirk within 
lusts labyrinth and were professed critic in lechery and i would look 
upon him and applaud him this were a sin: but here tis contrary a pious 
work mere charity for physic and honest polity to assure mine own. cel: 
o heaven canst thou suffer such a change volp: thou art mine honour 
mosca and my pride my joy my tickling my delight go bring them. mos 
advancing.: please you draw near sir. corv: come on what you will not be 
rebellious by that light mos: sir signior corvino here is come to see 
you. volp: oh mos: and hearing of the consultation had so lately for 
your health is come to offer or rather sir to prostitute corv: thanks 
sweet mosca. mos: freely unaskd or unintreated corv: well. mos: as the 
true fervent instance of his love his own most fair and proper wife the 
beauty only of price in venice corv: tis well urged. mos: to be your 
comfortress and to preserve you. volp: alas i am past already pray you 
thank him for his good care and promptness but for that tis a vain 
labour een to fight gainst heaven applying fire to stone coughing. uh uh 
uh uh making a dead leaf grow again. i take his wishes gently though and 
you may tell him what i have done for him: marry my state is hopeless. 
will him to pray for me and to use his fortune with reverence when he 
comes tot. mos: do you hear sir go to him with your wife. corv: heart of 
my father wilt thou persist thus come i pray thee come. thou seest tis 
nothing celia. by this hand i shall grow violent. come dot i say. cel: 
sir kill me rather: i will take down poison eat burning coals do any 
thing. corv: be damnd heart ill drag thee hence home by the hair cry 
thee a strumpet through the streets rip up thy mouth unto thine ears and 
slit thy nose like a raw rotchet do not tempt me come yield i am loth 
death i will buy some slave whom i will kill and bind thee to him alive 
and at my window hang you forth: devising some monstrous crime which i 
in capital letters will eat into thy flesh with aquafortis and burning 
corsives on this stubborn breast. now by the blood thou hast incensed 
ill do it cel: sir what you please you may i am your martyr. corv: be 
not thus obstinate i have not deserved it: think who it is intreats you. 
prithee sweet good faith thou shalt have jewels gowns attires what thou 
wilt think and ask. do but go kiss him. or touch him but for my sake. at 
my suit. this once. no not i shall remember this. will you disgrace me 
thus do you thirst my undoing mos: nay gentle lady be advised. corv: no 
no. she has watchd her time. ods precious this is scurvy tis very 
scurvy: and you are mos: nay good sir. corv: an arrant locust by heaven 
a locust whore crocodile that hast thy tears prepared expecting how 
thoult bid them flow mos: nay pray you sir she will consider. cel: would 
my life would serve to satisfy corv: sdeath if she would but speak to 
him and save my reputation it were somewhat but spightfully to affect my 
utter ruin mos: ay now you have put your fortune in her hands. why 
ifaith it is her modesty i must quit her. if you were absent she would 
be more coming i know it: and dare undertake for her. what woman can 
before her husband pray you let us depart and leave her here. corv: 
sweet celia thou mayst redeem all yet ill say no more: if not esteem 
yourself as lost nay stay there. shuts the door and exit with mosca. 
cel: o god and his good angels whither whither is shame fled human 
breasts that with such ease men dare put off your honours and their own 
is that which ever was a cause of life now placed beneath the basest 
circumstance and modesty an exile made for money volp: ay in corvino and 
such earthfed minds leaping from his couch. that never tasted the true 
heaven of love. assure thee celia he that would sell thee only for hope 
of gain and that uncertain he would have sold his part of paradise for 
ready money had he met a copeman. why art thou mazed to see me thus 
revived rather applaud thy beautys miracle tis thy great work: that hath 
not now alone but sundry times raised me in several shapes and but this 
morning like a mountebank to see thee at thy window: ay before i would 
have left my practice for thy love in varying figures i would have 
contended with the blue proteus or the horned flood. now art thou 
welcome. cel: sir volp: nay fly me not. nor let thy false imagination 
that i was bedrid make thee think i am so: thou shalt not find it. i am 
now as fresh as hot as high and in as jovial plight as when in that so 
celebrated scene at recitation of our comedy for entertainment of the 
great valois i acted young antinous and attracted the eyes and ears of 
all the ladies present to admire each graceful gesture note and footing. 
sings. come my celia let us prove while we can the sports of love time 
will not be ours for ever he at length our good will sever spend not 
then his gifts in vain suns that set may rise again: but if once we 
loose this light tis with us perpetual night. why should we defer our 
joys fame and rumour are but toys. cannot we delude the eyes of a few 
poor household spies or his easier ears beguile thus remooved by our 
wile tis no sin loves fruits to steal: but the sweet thefts to reveal to 
be taken to be seen these have crimes accounted been. cel: some serene 
blast me or dire lightning strike this my offending face volp: why 
droops my celia thou hast in place of a base husband found a worthy 
lover: use thy fortune well with secrecy and pleasure. see behold what 
thou art queen of not in expectation as i feed others: but possessd and 
crownd. see here a rope of pearl and each more orient than that the 
brave egyptian queen caroused: dissolve and drink them. see a carbuncle 
may put out both the eyes of our st mark a diamond would have bought 
lollia paulina when she came in like starlight hid with jewels that were 
the spoils of provinces take these and wear and lose them: yet remains 
an earring to purchase them again and this whole state. a gem but worth 
a private patrimony is nothing: we will eat such at a meal. the heads of 
parrots tongues of nightingales the brains of peacocks and of estriches 
shall be our food: and could we get the phoenix though nature lost her 
kind she were our dish. cel: good sir these things might move a mind 
affected with such delights but i whose innocence is all i can think 
wealthy or worth th enjoying and which once lost i have nought to lose 
beyond it cannot be taken with these sensual baits: if you have 
conscience volp: tis the beggars virtue if thou hast wisdom hear me 
celia. thy baths shall be the juice of julyflowers spirit of roses and 
of violets the milk of unicorns and panthers breath gatherd in bags and 
mixt with cretan wines. our drink shall be prepared gold and amber which 
we will take until my roof whirl round with the vertigo: and my dwarf 
shall dance my eunuch sing my fool make up the antic. whilst we in 
changed shapes act ovids tales thou like europa now and i like jove then 
i like mars and thou like erycine: so of the rest till we have quite run 
through and wearied all the fables of the gods. then will i have thee in 
more modern forms attired like some sprightly dame of france brave 
tuscan lady or proud spanish beauty sometimes unto the persian sophys 
wife or the grand signiors mistress and for change to one of our most 
artful courtezans or some quick negro or cold russian and i will meet 
thee in as many shapes: where we may so transfuse our wandering souls 
out at our lips and score up sums of pleasures sings. that the curious 
shall not know how to tell them as they flow and the envious when they 
find what there number is be pined. cel: if you have ears that will be 
piercd or eyes that can be opend a heart that may be touchd or any part 
that yet sounds man about you if you have touch of holy saints or heaven 
do me the grace to let me scape if not be bountiful and kill me. you do 
know i am a creature hither ill betrayd by one whose shame i would 
forget it were: if you will deign me neither of these graces yet feed 
your wrath sir rather than your lust it is a vice comes nearer manliness 
and punish that unhappy crime of nature which you miscall my beauty flay 
my face or poison it with ointments for seducing your blood to this 
rebellion. rub these hands with what may cause an eating leprosy een to 
my bones and marrow: any thing that may disfavour me save in my honour 
and i will kneel to you pray for you pay down a thousand hourly vows sir 
for your health report and think you virtuous volp: think me cold frosen 
and impotent and so report me that i had nestors hernia thou wouldst 
think. i do degenerate and abuse my nation to play with opportunity thus 
long i should have done the act and then have parleyd. yield or ill 
force thee. seizes her. cel: o just god volp: in vain bon rushing in: 
forbear foul ravisher libidinous swine free the forced lady or thou 
diest impostor. but that im loth to snatch thy punishment out of the 
hand of justice thou shouldst yet be made the timely sacrifice of 
vengeance before this altar and this dross thy idol. lady lets quit the 
place it is the den of villany fear nought you have a guard: and he ere 
long shall meet his just reward. exeunt bon. and cel. volp: fall on me 
roof and bury me in ruin become my grave that wert my shelter o i am 
unmaskd unspirited undone betrayd to beggary to infamy enter mosca 
wounded and bleeding. mos: where shall i run most wretched shame of men 
to beat out my unlucky brains volp: here here. what dost thou bleed mos: 
o that his welldrivn sword had been so courteous to have cleft me down 
unto the navel ere i lived to see my life my hopes my spirits my patron 
all thus desperately engaged by my error volp: woe on thy fortune mos: 
and my follies sir. volp: thou hast made me miserable. mos: and myself 
sir. who would have thought he would have harkend so volp: what shall we 
do mos: i know not if my heart could expiate the mischance id pluck it 
out. will you be pleased to hang me or cut my throat and ill requite you 
sir. let us die like romans since we have lived like grecians. knocking 
within. volp: hark whos there i hear some footing officers the saffi 
come to apprehend us i do feel the brand hissing already at my forehead 
now mine ears are boring. mos: to your couch sir you make that place 
good however. volpone lies down as before. guilty men suspect what they 
deserve still. enter corbaccio. signior corbaccio corb: why how now 
mosca mos: o undone amazed sir. your son i know not by what accident 
acquainted with your purpose to my patron touching your will and making 
him your heir enterd our house with violence his sword drawn sought for 
you calld you wretch unnatural vowd he would kill you. corb: me mos: yes 
and my patron. corb: this act shall disinherit him indeed here is the 
will. mos: tis well sir. corb: right and well: be you as careful now for 
me. enter voltore behind. mos: my life sir is not more tenderd i am only 
yours. corb: how does he will he die shortly thinkst thou mos: i fear 
hell outlast may. corb: today mos: no last out may sir. corb: couldst 
thou not give him a dram mos: o by no means sir. corb: nay ill not bid 
you. volt coming forward.: this is a knave i see. mos seeing voltore.: 
how signior voltore aside. did he hear me volt: parasite mos: whos that 
o sir most timely welcome volt: scarce to the discovery of your tricks i 
fear. you are his only and mine also are you not mos: who i sir volt: 
you sir. what device is this about a will mos: a plot for you sir. volt: 
come put not your foists upon me i shall scent them. mos: did you not 
hear it volt: yes i hear corbaccio hath made your patron there his heir. 
mos: tis true by my device drawn to it by my plot with hope volt: your 
patron should reciprocate and you have promised mos: for your good i did 
sir. nay more i told his son brought hid him here where he might hear 
his father pass the deed: being persuaded to it by this thought sir that 
the unnaturalness first of the act and then his fathers oft disclaiming 
in him which i did mean thelp on would sure enrage him to do some 
violence upon his parent on which the law should take sufficient hold 
and you be stated in a double hope: truth be my comfort and my 
conscience my only aim was to dig you a fortune out of these two old 
rotten sepulchres volt: i cry thee mercy mosca. mos: worth your patience 
and your great merit sir. and see the change volt: why what success mos: 
most happless you must help sir. whilst we expected the old raven in 
comes corvinos wife sent hither by her husband volt: what with a present 
mos: no sir on visitation ill tell you how anon and staying long the 
youth he grows impatient rushes forth seizeth the lady wounds me makes 
her swear or he would murder her that was his vow to affirm my patron to 
have done her rape: which how unlike it is you see and hence with that 
pretext hes gone to accuse his father defame my patron defeat you volt: 
where is her husband let him be sent for straight. mos: sir ill go fetch 
him. volt: bring him to the scrutineo. mos: sir i will. volt: this must 
be stopt. mos: o you do nobly sir. alas twas labord all sir for your 
good nor was there want of counsel in the plot: but fortune can at any 
time oerthrow the projects of a hundred learned clerks sir. corb 
listening: whats that volt: willt please you sir to go along exit 
corbaccio followed by voltore. mos: patron go in and pray for our 
success. volp rising from his couch.: need makes devotion: heaven your 
labour bless exeunt. act . scene .. a street. enter sir politick wouldbe 
and peregrine. sir p: i told you sir it was a plot: you see what 
observation is you mentiond me for some instructions: i will tell you 
sir since we are met here in this height of venice some few perticulars 
i have set down only for this meridian fit to be known of your crude 
traveller and they are these. i will not touch sir at your phrase or 
clothes for they are old. per: sir i have better. sir p: pardon i meant 
as they are themes. per: o sir proceed: ill slander you no more of wit 
good sir. sir p: first for your garb it must be grave and serious very 
reservd and lockd not tell a secret on any terms not to your father 
scarce a fable but with caution make sure choice both of your company 
and discourse beware you never speak a truth per: how sir p: not to 
strangers for those be they you must converse with most others i would 
not know sir but at distance so as i still might be a saver in them: you 
shall have tricks else past upon you hourly. and then for your religion 
profess none but wonder at the diversity of all: and for your part 
protest were there no other but simply the laws o the land you could 
content you nic. machiavel and monsieur bodin both were of this mind. 
then must you learn the use and handling of your silver fork at meals 
the metal of your glass these are main matters with your italian and to 
know the hour when you must eat your melons and your figs. per: is that 
a point of state too sir p: here it is for your venetian if he see a man 
preposterous in the least he has him straight he has he strips him. ill 
acquaint you sir i now have lived here tis some fourteen months within 
the first week of my landing here all took me for a citizen of venice: i 
knew the forms so well per aside.: and nothing else. sir p: i had read 
contarene took me a house dealt with my jews to furnish it with 
moveables well if i could but find one man one man to mine own heart 
whom i durst trust i would per: what what sir sir p: make him rich make 
him a fortune: he should not think again. i would command it. per: as 
how sir p: with certain projects that i have which i may not discover. 
per aside.: if i had but one to wager with i would lay odds now he tells 
me instantly. sir p: one is and that i care not greatly who knows to 
serve the state of venice with red herrings for three years and at a 
certain rate from rotterdam where i have correspendence. theres a letter 
sent me from one of the states and to that purpose: he cannot write his 
name but thats his mark. per: hes a chandler sir p: no a cheesemonger. 
there are some others too with whom i treat about the same negociation 
and i will undertake it: for tis thus. ill dot with ease i have cast it 
all: your hoy carries but three men in her and a boy and she shall make 
me three returns a year: so if there come but one of three i save if two 
i can defalk: but this is now if my main project fail. per: then you 
have others sir p: i should be loth to draw the subtle air of such a 
place without my thousand aims. ill not dissemble sir: whereer i come i 
love to be considerative and tis true i have at my free hours thought 
upon some certain goods unto the state of venice which i do call my 
cautions and sir which i mean in hope of pension to propound to the 
great council then unto the forty so to the ten. my means are made 
already per: by whom sir p: sir one that though his place be obscure yet 
he can sway and they will hear him. hes a commandador. per: what a 
common serjeant sir p: sir such as they are put it in their mouths what 
they should say sometimes as well as greater: i think i have my notes to 
shew you searching his pockets. per: good sir. sir p: but you shall 
swear unto me on your gentry not to anticipate per: i sir sir p: nor 
reveal a circumstance my paper is not with me. per: o but you can 
remember sir. sir p: my first is concerning tinderboxes. you must know 
no family is here without its box. now sir it being so portable a thing 
put case that you or i were ill affected unto the state sir with it in 
our pockets might not i go into the arsenal or you come out again and 
none the wiser per: except yourself sir. sir p: go to then. i therefore 
advertise to the state how fit it were that none but such as were known 
patriots sound lovers of their country should be sufferd to enjoy them 
in their houses and even those seald at some office and at such a 
bigness as might not lurk in pockets. per: admirable sir p: my next is 
how to enquire and be resolvd by present demonstration whether a ship 
newly arrived from soria or from any suspected part of all the levant be 
guilty of the plague: and where they use to lie out forty fifty days 
sometimes about the lazaretto for their trial ill save that charge and 
loss unto the merchant and in an hour clear the doubt. per: indeed sir 
sir p: or i will lose my labour. per: my faith thats much. sir p: nay 
sir conceive me. it will cost me in onions some thirty livres per: which 
is one pound sterling. sir p: beside my waterworks: for this i do sir. 
first i bring in your ship twixt two brick walls but those the state 
shall venture: on the one i strain me a fair tarpauling and in that i 
stick my onions cut in halves: the other is full of loopholes out at 
which i thrust the noses of my bellows and those bellows i keep with 
waterworks in perpetual motion which is the easiest matter of a hundred. 
now sir your onion which doth naturally attract the infection and your 
bellows blowing the air upon him will show instantly by his changed 
colour if there be contagion or else remain as fair as at the first. now 
it is known tis nothing. per: you are right sir. sir p: i would i had my 
note. per: faith so would i: but you have done well for once sir. sir p: 
were i false or would be made so i could shew you reasons how i could 
sell this state now to the turk spite of their galleys or their 
examining his papers. per: pray you sir pol. sir p: i have them not 
about me. per: that i feard. they are there sir. sir p: no. this is my 
diary wherein i note my actions of the day. per: pray you lets see sir. 
what is here reads. notandum a rat had gnawn my spurleathers 
notwithstanding i put on new and did go forth: but first i threw three 
beans over the threshold. item i went and bought two toothpicks whereof 
one i burst immediatly in a discourse with a dutch merchant bout ragion 
del stato. from him i went and paid a moccinigo for piecing my silk 
stockings by the way i cheapend sprats and at st. marks i urined. faith 
these are politic notes sir p: sir i do slip no action of my life but 
thus i quote it. per: believe me it is wise sir p: nay sir read forth. 
enter at a distance lady politickwould be nano and two waitingwomen. 
lady p: where should this loose knight be trow sure hes housed. nan: why 
then hes fast. lady p: ay he plays both with me. i pray you stay. this 
heat will do more harm to my complexion than his heart is worth i do not 
care to hinder but to take him. rubbing her cheeks. how it comes off 
wom: my masters yonder. lady p: where wom: with a young gentleman. lady 
p: that sames the party in mans apparel pray you sir jog my knight: ill 
be tender to his reputation however he demerit. sir p seeing her: my 
lady per: where sir p: tis she indeed sir you shall know her. she is 
were she not mine a lady of that merit for fashion and behaviour and for 
beauty i durst compare per: it seems you are not jealous that dare 
commend her. sir p: nay and for discourse per: being your wife she 
cannot miss that. sir p introducing per.: madam here is a gentleman pray 
you use him fairly he seems a youth but he is lady p: none. sir p: yes 
one has put his face as soon into the world lady p: you mean as early 
but today sir p: hows this lady p: why in this habit sir you apprehend 
me: well master wouldbe this doth not become you i had thought the odour 
sir of your good name had been more precious to you that you would not 
have done this dire massacre on your honour one of your gravity and rank 
besides but knights i see care little for the oath they make to ladies 
chiefly their own ladies. sir p: now by my spurs the symbol of my 
knighthood per aside.: lord how his brain is humbled for an oath sir p: 
i reach you not. lady p: right sir your policy may bear it through thus. 
to per. sir a word with you. i would be loth to contest publicly with 
any gentlewoman or to seem froward or violent as the courtier says it 
comes too near rusticity in a lady which i would shun by all means: and 
however i may deserve from master wouldbe yet thave one fair gentlewoman 
thus be made the unkind instrument to wrong another and one she knows 
not ay and to persever in my poor judgment is not warranted from being a 
solecism in our sex if not in manners. per: how is this sir p: sweet 
madam come nearer to your aim. lady p: marry and will sir. since you 
provoke me with your impudence and laughter of your light landsyren here 
your sporus your hermaphrodite per: whats here poetic fury and historic 
storms sir p: the gentleman believe it is of worth and of our nation. 
lady p: ay your whitefriars nation. come i blush for you master wouldbe 
i and am ashamd you should have no more forehead than thus to be the 
patron or st. george to a lewd harlot a base fricatrice a female devil 
in a male outside. sir p: nay and you be such a one i must bid adieu to 
your delights. the case appears too liquid. exit. lady p: ay you may 
carryt clear with your stateface but for your carnival concupiscence who 
here is fled for liberty of conscience from furious persecution of the 
marshal her will i disple. per: this is fine ifaith and do you use this 
often is this part of your wits exercise gainst you have occasion madam 
lady p: go to sir. per: do you hear me lady why if your knight have set 
you to beg shirts or to invite me home you might have done it a nearer 
way by far: lady p: this cannot work you out of my snare. per: why am i 
in it then indeed your husband told me you were fair and so you are only 
your nose inclines that side thats next the sun to the queenapple. lady 
p: this cannot be endurd by any patience. enter mosca. mos: what is the 
matter madam lady p: if the senate right not my quest in this ill 
protest them to all the world no aristocracy. mos: what is the injury 
lady lady p: why the callet you told me of here i have taen disguised. 
mos: who this what means your ladyship the creature i mentiond to you is 
apprehended now before the senate you shall see her lady p: where mos: 
ill bring you to her. this young gentleman i saw him land this morning 
at the port. lady p: ist possible how has my judgment wanderd sir i must 
blushing say to you i have errd and plead your pardon. per: what more 
changes yet lady p: i hope you have not the malice to remember a 
gentlewomans passion. if you stay in venice here please you to use me 
sir mos: will you go madam lady p: pray you sir use me. in faith the 
more you see me the more i shall conceive you have forgot our quarrel. 
exeunt lady wouldbe mosca nano and waitingwomen. per: this is rare sir 
politick wouldbe no sir politick bawd. to bring me thus acquainted with 
his wife well wise sir pol since you have practised thus upon my 
freshmanship ill try your salthead what proof it is against a 
counterplot. exit. scene .. the scrutineo or senatehouse. enter voltore 
corbaccio corvino and mosca. volt: well now you know the carriage of the 
business your constancy is all that is required unto the safety of it. 
mos: is the lie safely conveyd amongst us is that sure knows every man 
his burden corv: yes. mos: then shrink not. corv: but knows the advocate 
the truth mos: o sir by no means i devised a formal tale that salvd your 
reputation. but be valiant sir. corv: i fear no one but him that this 
his pleading should make him stand for a coheir mos: cohalter hang him 
we will but use his tongue his noise as we do croakers here. corv: ay 
what shall he do mos: when we have done you mean corv: yes. mos: why 
well think: sell him for mummia hes half dust already. to voltore. do 
not you smile to see this buffalo how he does sport it with his head 
aside. i should if all were well and past. to corbaccio. sir only you 
are he that shall enjoy the crop of all and these not know for whom they 
toil. corb: ay peace. mos turning to corvino.: but you shall eat it. 
much aside. to voltore. worshipful sir mercury sit upon your thundering 
tongue or the french hercules and make your language as conquering as 
his club to beat along as with a tempest flat our adversaries but much 
more yours sir. volt: here they come have done. mos: i have another 
witness if you need sir i can produce. volt: who is it mos: sir i have 
her. enter avocatori and take their seats bonario celia notario 
commandadori saffi and other officers of justice. avoc: the like of this 
the senate never heard of. avoc: twill come most strange to them when we 
report it. avoc: the gentlewoman has been ever held of unreproved name. 
avoc: so has the youth. avoc: the more unnatural part that of his 
father. avoc: more of the husband. avoc: i not know to give his act a 
name it is so monstrous avoc: but the impostor hes a thing created to 
exceed example avoc: and all aftertimes avoc: i never heard a true 
voluptuary discribed but him. avoc: appear yet those were cited not: all 
but the old magnifico volpone. avoc: why is not he here mos: please your 
fatherhoods here is his advocate: himselfs so weak so feeble avoc: what 
are you bon: his parasite his knave his pandar i beseech the court he 
may be forced to come that your grave eyes may bear strong witness of 
his strange impostures. volt: upon my faith and credit with your virtues 
he is not able to endure the air. avoc: bring him however. avoc: we will 
see him. avoc: fetch him. volt: your fatherhoods fit pleasures be obeyd 
exeunt officers. but sure the sight will rather move your pities than 
indignation. may it please the court in the mean time he may be heard in 
me i know this place most void of prejudice and therefore crave it since 
we have no reason to fear our truth should hurt our cause. avoc: speak 
free. volt: then know most honourd fathers i must now discover to your 
strangely abused ears the most prodigious and most frontless piece of 
solid impudence and treachery that ever vicious nature yet brought forth 
to shame the state of venice. this lewd woman that wants no artificial 
looks or tears to help the vizor she has now put on hath long been known 
a close adulteress to that lascivious youth there not suspected i say 
but known and taken in the act with him and by this man the easy husband 
pardond: whose timeless bounty makes him now stand here the most unhappy 
innocent person that ever mans own goodness made accused. for these not 
knowing how to owe a gift of that dear grace but with their shame being 
placed so above all powers of their gratitude began to hate the benefit 
and in place of thanks devise to extirpe the memory of such an act: 
wherein i pray your fatherhoods to observe the malice yea the rage of 
creatures discoverd in their evils and what heart such take even from 
their crimes: but that anon will more appear. this gentleman the father 
hearing of this foul fact with many others which daily struck at his too 
tender ears and grieved in nothing more than that he could not preserve 
himself a parent his sons ills growing to that strange flood at last 
decreed to disinherit him. avoc: these be strange turns avoc: the young 
mans fame was ever fair and honest. volt: so much more full of danger is 
his vice that can beguile so under shade of virtue. but as i said my 
honourd sires his father having this settled purpose by what means to 
him betrayd we know not and this day appointed for the deed that 
parricide i cannot style him better by confederacy preparing this his 
paramour to be there enterd volpones house who was the man your 
fatherhoods must understand designd for the inheritance there sought his 
father: but with what purpose sought he him my lords i tremble to 
pronounce it that a son unto a father and to such a father should have 
so foul felonious intent it was to murder him: when being prevented by 
his more happy absence what then did he not check his wicked thoughts no 
now new deeds mischief doth ever end where it begins an act of horror 
fathers he draggd forth the aged gentleman that had there lain bedrid 
three years and more out of his innocent couch naked upon the floor 
there left him wounded his servant in the face: and with this strumpet 
the stale to his forged practice who was glad to be so active i shall 
here desire your fatherhoods to note but my collections as most 
remarkable thought at once to stop his fathers ends discredit his free 
choice in the old gentleman redeem themselves by laying infamy upon this 
man to whom with blushing they should owe their lives. avoc: what proofs 
have you of this bon: most honoured fathers i humbly crave there be no 
credit given to this mans mercenary tongue. avoc: forbear. bon: his soul 
moves in his fee. avoc: o sir. bon: this fellow for six sols more would 
plead against his maker. avoc: you do forget yourself. volt: nay nay 
grave fathers let him have scope: can any man imagine that he will spare 
his accuser that would not have spared his parent avoc: well produce 
your proofs. cel: i would i could forget i were a creature. volt: 
signior corbaccio. corbaccio comes forward. avoc: what is he volt: the 
father. avoc: has he had an oath not: yes. corb: what must i do now not: 
your testimonys craved. corb: speak to the knave ill have my mouth first 
stopt with earth my heart abhors his knowledge: i disclaim in him. avoc: 
but for what cause corb: the mere portent of nature he is an utter 
stranger to my loins. bon: have they made you to this corb: i will not 
hear thee monster of men swine goat wolf parricide speak not thou viper. 
bon: sir i will sit down and rather wish my innocence should suffer then 
i resist the authority of a father. volt: signior corvino corvino comes 
forward. avoc: this is strange. avoc: whos this not: the husband. avoc: 
is he sworn not: he is. avoc: speak then. corv: this woman please your 
fatherhoods is a whore of most hot exercise more than a partrich upon 
record avoc: no more. corv: neighs like a jennet. not: preserve the 
honour of the court. corv: i shall and modesty of your most reverend 
ears. and yet i hope that i may say these eyes have seen her glued unto 
that piece of cedar that fine welltimberd gallant and that here the 
letters may be read through the horn that make the story perfect. mos: 
excellent sir. corv aside to mosca.: theres no shame in this now is 
there mos: none. corv: or if i said i hoped that she were onward to her 
damnation if there be a hell greater than whore and woman a good 
catholic may make the doubt. avoc: his grief hath made him frantic. 
avoc: remove him hence. avoc: look to the woman. celia swoons. corv: 
rare prettily feignd again avoc: stand from about her. avoc: give her 
the air. avoc to mosca.: what can you say mos: my wound may it please 
your wisdoms speaks for me received in aid of my good patron when he 
mist his soughtfor father when that welltaught dame had her cue given 
her to cry out a rape bon: o most laid impudence fathers avoc: sir be 
silent you had your hearing free so must they theirs. avoc: i do begin 
to doubt the imposture here. avoc: this woman has too many moods. volt: 
grave fathers she is a creature of a most profest and prostituted 
lewdness. corv: most impetuous unsatisfied grave fathers volt: may her 
feignings not take your wisdoms: but this day she baited a stranger a 
grave knight with her loose eyes and more lascivious kisses. this man 
saw them together on the water in a gondola. mos: here is the lady 
herself that saw them too without who then had in the open streets 
pursued them but for saving her knights honour. avoc: produce that lady. 
avoc: let her come. exit mosca. avoc: these things they strike with 
wonder avoc: i am turnd a stone. reenter mosca with lady wouldbe. mos: 
be resolute madam. lady p: ay this same is she. pointing to celia. out 
thou chameleon harlot now thine eyes vie tears with the hyaena. darst 
thou look upon my wronged face i cry your pardons i fear i have 
forgettingly transgrest against the dignity of the court avoc: no madam. 
lady p: and been exorbitant avoc: you have not lady. avoc: these proofs 
are strong. lady p: surely i had no purpose to scandalise your honours 
or my sexs. avoc: we do believe it. lady p: surely you may believe it. 
avoc: madam we do. lady p: indeed you may my breeding is not so coarse 
avoc: we know it. lady p: to offend with pertinacy avoc: lady lady p: 
such a presence no surely. avoc: we well think it. lady p: you may think 
it. avoc: let her oercome. what witnesses have you to make good your 
report bon: our consciences. cel: and heaven that never fails the 
innocent. avoc: these are no testimonies. bon: not in your courts where 
multitude and clamour overcomes. avoc: nay then you do wax insolent. 
reenter officers bearing volpone on a couch. volt: here here the 
testimony comes that will convince and put to utter dumbness their bold 
tongues: see here grave fathers heres the ravisher the rider on mens 
wives the great impostor the grand voluptuary do you not think these 
limbs should affect venery or these eyes covet a concubine pray you mark 
these hands are they not fit to stroke a ladys breasts perhaps he doth 
dissemble bon: so he does. volt: would you have him tortured bon: i 
would have him proved. volt: best try him then with goads or burning 
irons put him to the strappado: i have heard the rack hath cured the 
gout faith give it him and help him of a malady be courteous. ill 
undertake before these honourd fathers he shall have yet as many left 
diseases as she has known adulterers or thou strumpets. o my most equal 
hearers if these deeds acts of this bold and most exorbitant strain may 
pass with sufferance what one citizen but owes the forfeit of his life 
yea fame to him that dares traduce him which of you are safe my honourd 
fathers i would ask with leave of your grave fatherhoods if their plot 
have any face or colour like to truth or if unto the dullest nostril 
here it smell not rank and most abhorred slander i crave your care of 
this good gentleman whose life is much endangerd by their fable and as 
for them i will conclude with this that vicious persons when theyre hot 
and fleshd in impious acts their constancy abounds: damnd deeds are done 
with greatest confidence. avoc: take them to custody and sever them. 
avoc: tis pity two such prodigies should live. avoc: let the old 
gentleman be returnd with care exeunt officers with volpone. im sorry 
our credulity hath wrongd him. avoc: these are two creatures avoc: ive 
an earthquake in me. avoc: their shame even in their cradles fled their 
faces. avoc to volt.: you have done a worthy service to the state sir in 
their discovery. avoc: you shall hear ere night what punishment the 
court decrees upon them. exeunt avocat. not. and officers with bonario 
and celia. volt: we thank your fatherhoods. how like you it mos: rare. 
id have your tongue sir tipt with gold for this id have you be the heir 
to the whole city the earth id have want men ere you want living: theyre 
bound to erect your statue in st. marks. signior corvino i would have 
you go and shew yourself that you have conquerd. corv: yes. mos: it was 
much better that you should profess yourself a cuckold thus than that 
the other should have been provd. corv: nay i considerd that: now it is 
her fault: mos: then it had been yours. corv: true i do doubt this 
advocate still. mos: ifaith you need not i dare ease you of that care. 
corv: i trust thee mosca. exit. mos: as your own soul sir. corb: mosca 
mos: now for your business sir. corb: how have you business mos: yes 
yours sir. corb: o none else mos: none else not i. corb: be careful 
then. mos: rest you with both your eyes sir. corb: dispatch it. mos: 
instantly. corb: and look that all whatever be put in jewels plate 
moneys household stuff bedding curtains. mos: curtainrings sir. only the 
advocates fee must be deducted. corb: ill pay him now youll be too 
prodigal. mos: sir i must tender it. corb: two chequines is well mos: no 
six sir. corb: tis too much. mos: he talkd a great while you must 
consider that sir. corb: well theres three mos: ill give it him. corb: 
do so and theres for thee. exit. mos aside.: bountiful bones what horrid 
strange offence did he commit gainst nature in his youth worthy this age 
to volt. you see sir how i work unto your ends take you no notice. volt: 
no ill leave you. exit. mos: all is yours the devil and all: good 
advocate madam ill bring you home. lady p: no ill go see your patron. 
mos: that you shall not: ill tell you why. my purpose is to urge my 
patron to reform his will and for the zeal you have shewn today whereas 
before you were but third or fourth you shall be now put in the first 
which would appear as beggd if you were present. therefore lady p: you 
shall sway me. exeunt. act . scene . a room in volpones house. enter 
volpone. volp: well i am here and all this brunt is past. i neer was in 
dislike with my disguise till this fled moment here twas good in private 
but in your public cave whilst i breathe. fore god my left leg began to 
have the cramp and i apprehended straight some power had struck me with 
a dead palsy: well i must be merry and shake it off. a many of these 
fears would put me into some villanous disease should they come thick 
upon me: ill prevent em. give me a bowl of lusty wine to fright this 
humour from my heart. drinks. hum hum hum tis almost gone already i 
shall conquer. any device now of rare ingenious knavery that would 
possess me with a violent laughter would make me up again. drinks again. 
so so so so this heat is life tis blood by this time: mosca enter mosca. 
mos: how now sir does the day look clear again are we recoverd and 
wrought out of error into our way to see our path before us is our trade 
free once more volp: exquisite mosca mos: was it not carried learnedly 
volp: and stoutly: good wits are greatest in extremities. mos: it were a 
folly beyond thought to trust any grand act unto a cowardly spirit: you 
are not taken with it enough methinks volp: o more than if i had enjoyd 
the wench: the pleasure of all womankinds not like it. mos: why now you 
speak sir. we must here be fixd here we must rest this is our 
masterpiece we cannot think to go beyond this. volp: true. thou hast 
playd thy prize my precious mosca. mos: nay sir to gull the court volp: 
and quite divert the torrent upon the innocent. mos: yes and to make so 
rare a music out of discords volp: right. that yet to mes the strangest 
how thou hast borne it that these being so divided mongst themselves 
should not scent somewhat or in me or thee or doubt their own side. mos: 
true they will not seet. too much light blinds them i think. each of 
them is so possest and stuft with his own hopes that any thing unto the 
contrary never so true or never so apparent never so palpable they will 
resist it volp: like a temptation of the devil. mos: right sir. 
merchants may talk of trade and your great signiors of land that yields 
well but if italy have any glebe more fruitful than these fellows i am 
deceivd. did not your advocate rare volp: o my most honourd fathers my 
grave fathers under correction of your fatherhoods what face of truth is 
here if these strange deeds may pass most honourd fathers i had much ado 
to forbear laughing. mos: it seemd to me you sweat sir. volp: in troth i 
did a little. mos: but confess sir were you not daunted volp: in good 
faith i was a little in a mist but not dejected never but still my self. 
mos: i think it sir. now so truth help me i must needs say this sir and 
out of conscience for your advocate: he has taken pains in faith sir and 
deservd in my poor judgment i speak it under favour not to contrary you 
sir very richly well to be cozend. volp: troth and i think so too by 
that i heard him in the latter end. mos: o but before sir: had you heard 
him first draw it to certain heads then aggravate then use his vehement 
figures i lookd still when he would shift a shirt: and doing this out of 
pure love no hope of gain volp: tis right. i cannot answer him mosca as 
i would not yet but for thy sake at thy entreaty i will begin even now 
to vex them all this very instant. mos: good sir. volp: call the dwarf 
and eunuch forth. mos: castrone nano enter castrone and nano. nano: 
here. volp: shall we have a jig now mos: what you please sir. volp: go 
straight give out about the streets you two that i am dead do it with 
constancy sadly do you hear impute it to the grief of this late slander. 
exeunt cast. and nano. mos: what do you mean sir volp: o i shall have 
instantly my vulture crow raven come flying hither on the news to peck 
for carrion my shewolfe and all greedy and full of expectation mos: and 
then to have it ravishd from their mouths volp: tis true. i will have 
thee put on a gown and take upon thee as thou wert mine heir: shew them 
a will open that chest and reach forth one of those that has the blanks 
ill straight put in thy name. mos gives him a paper.: it will be rare 
sir. volp: ay when they evn gape and find themselves deluded mos: yes. 
volp: and thou use them scurvily dispatch get on thy gown. mos putting 
on a gown.: but what sir if they ask after the body volp: say it was 
corrupted. mos: ill say it stunk sir and was fain to have it coffind up 
instantly and sent away. volp: any thing what thou wilt. hold heres my 
will. get thee a cap a countbook pen and ink papers afore thee sit as 
thou wert taking an inventory of parcels: ill get up behind the curtain 
on a stool and hearken sometime peep over see how they do look with what 
degrees their blood doth leave their faces o twill afford me a rare meal 
of laughter mos putting on a cap and setting out the table etc.: your 
advocate will turn stark dull upon it. volp: it will take off his 
oratorys edge. mos: but your clarissimo old roundback he will crump you 
like a hoglouse with the touch. volp: and what corvino mos: o sir look 
for him tomorrow morning with a rope and dagger to visit all the streets 
he must run mad. my lady too that came into the court to bear false 
witness for your worship volp: yes and kist me fore the fathers when my 
face flowd all with oils. mos: and sweat sir. why your gold is such 
another medcine it dries up all those offensive savours: it transforms 
the most deformed and restores them lovely as twere the strange poetical 
girdle. jove could not invent t himself a shroud more subtle to pass 
acrisius guards. it is the thing makes all the world her grace her youth 
her beauty. volp: i think she loves me. mos: who the lady sir shes 
jealous of you. volp: dost thou say so knocking within. mos: hark theres 
some already. volp: look. mos: it is the vulture: he has the quickest 
scent. volp: ill to my place thou to thy posture. goes behind the 
curtain. mos: i am set. volp: but mosca play the artificer now torture 
them rarely. enter voltore. volt: how now my mosca mos writing.: turkey 
carpets nine volt: taking an inventory that is well. mos: two suits of 
bedding tissue volt: wheres the will let me read that the while. enter 
servants with corbaccio in a chair. corb: so set me down: and get you 
home. exeunt servants. volt: is he come now to trouble us mos: of cloth 
of gold two more corb: is it done mosca mos: of several velvets eight 
volt: i like his care. corb: dost thou not hear enter corvino. corb: ha 
is the hour come mosca volp peeping over the curtain.: ay now they 
muster. corv: what does the advocate here or this corbaccio corb: what 
do these here enter lady pol. wouldbe. lady p: mosca is his thread spun 
mos: eight chests of linen volp: o my fine dame wouldbe too corv: mosca 
the will that i may shew it these and rid them hence. mos: six chests of 
diaper four of damask. there. gives them the will carelessly over his 
shoulder. corb: is that the will mos: downbeds and bolsters volp: rare 
be busy still. now they begin to flutter: they never think of me. look 
see see see how their swift eyes run over the long deed unto the name 
and to the legacies what is bequeathd them there mos: ten suits of 
hangings volp: ay in their garters mosca. now their hopes are at the 
gasp. volt: mosca the heir corb: whats that volp: my advocate is dumb 
look to my merchant he has heard of some strange storm a ship is lost he 
faints my lady will swoon. old glazen eyes he hath not reachd his 
despair yet. corb takes the will.: all these are out of hope: i am sure 
the man. corv: but mosca mos: two cabinets. corv: is this in earnest 
mos: one of ebony corv: or do you but delude me mos: the other mother of 
pearl i am very busy. good faith it is a fortune thrown upon me item one 
salt of agate not my seeking. lady p: do you hear sir mos: a perfumd box 
pray you forbear you see im troubled made of an onyx lady p: how mos: 
tomorrow or next day i shall be at leisure to talk with you all. corv: 
is this my large hopes issue lady p: sir i must have a fairer answer. 
mos: madam marry and shall: pray you fairly quit my house. nay raise no 
tempest with your looks but hark you remember what your ladyship offerd 
me to put you in an heir go to think on it: and what you said een your 
best madams did for maintenance and why not you enough. go home and use 
the poor sir pol your knight well for fear i tell some riddles go be 
melancholy. exit lady wouldbe. volp: o my fine devil corv: mosca pray 
you a word. mos: lord will you not take your dispatch hence yet methinks 
of all you should have been the example. why should you stay here with 
what thought what promise hear you do not you know i know you an ass and 
that you would most fain have been a wittol if fortune would have let 
you that you are a declared cuckold on good terms this pearl youll say 
was yours right: this diamond ill not denyt but thank you. much here 
else it may be so. why think that these good works may help to hide your 
bad. ill not betray you although you be but extraordinary and have it 
only in title it sufficeth: go home be melancholy too or mad. exit 
corvino. volp: rare mosca how his villany becomes him volt: certain he 
doth delude all these for me. corb: mosca the heir volp: o his four eyes 
have found it. corb: i am cozend cheated by a parasite slave harlot thou 
hast gulld me. mos: yes sir. stop your mouth or i shall draw the only 
tooth is left. are not you he that filthy covetous wretch with the three 
legs that here in hope of prey have any time this three years snuffd 
about with your most grovelling nose and would have hired me to the 
poisoning of my patron sir are not you he that have today in court 
professd the disinheriting of your son perjured yourself go home and die 
and stink. if you but croak a syllable all comes out: away and call your 
porters exit corbaccio. go go stink. volp: excellent varlet volt: now my 
faithful mosca i find thy constancy. mos: sir volt: sincere. mos 
writing.: a table of porphyry i marle youll be thus troublesome. volp: 
nay leave off now they are gone. mos: why who are you what who did send 
for you o cry you mercy reverend sir good faith i am grieved for you 
that any chance of mine should thus defeat your i must needs say most 
deserving travails: but i protest sir it was cast upon me and i could 
almost wish to be without it but that the will o the dead must be 
observd marry my joy is that you need it not you have a gift sir thank 
your education will never let you want while there are men and malice to 
breed causes. would i had but half the like for all my fortune sir if i 
have any suits as i do hope things being so easy and direct i shall not 
i will make bold with your obstreperous aid conceive me for your fee 
sir. in mean time you that have so much law i know have the conscience 
not to be covetous of what is mine. good sir i thank you for my plate 
twill help to set up a young man. good faith you look as you were 
costive best go home and purge sir. exit voltore. volp comes from behind 
the curtain.: bid him eat lettuce well. my witty mischief let me embrace 
thee. o that i could now transform thee to a venus mosca go straight 
take my habit of clarissimo and walk the streets be seen torment them 
more: we must pursue as well as plot. who would have lost this feast 
mos: i doubt it will lose them. volp: o my recovery shall recover all. 
that i could now but think on some disguise to meet them in and ask them 
questions: how i would vex them still at every turn mos: sir i can fit 
you. volp: canst thou mos: yes i know one o the commandadori sir so like 
you him will i straight make drunk and bring you his habit. volp: a rare 
disguise and answering thy brain o i will be a sharp disease unto them. 
mos: sir you must look for curses volp: till they burst the fox fares 
ever best when he is curst. exeunt. scene .. a hall in sir politicks 
house. enter peregrine disguised and three merchants. per: am i enough 
disguised mer: i warrant you. per: all my ambition is to fright him 
only. mer: if you could ship him away twere excellent. mer: to zant or 
to aleppo per: yes and have his adventures put i the book of voyages. 
and his gulld story registerd for truth. well gentlemen when i am in a 
while and that you think us warm in our discourse know your approaches. 
mer: trust it to our care. exeunt merchants. enter waitingwoman. per: 
save you fair lady is sir pol within wom: i do not know sir. per: pray 
you say unto him here is a merchant upon earnest business desires to 
speak with him. wom: i will see sir. exit. per: pray you. i see the 
family is all female here. reenter waitingwoman. wom: he says sir he has 
weighty affairs of state that now require him whole some other time you 
may possess him. per: pray you say again if those require him whole 
these will exact him whereof i bring him tidings. exit woman. what might 
be his grave affair of state now how to make bolognian sausages here in 
venice sparing one o the ingredients reenter waitingwoman. wom: sir he 
says he knows by your word tidings that you are no statesman and 
therefore wills you stay. per: sweet pray you return him i have not read 
so many proclamations and studied them for words as he has done but here 
he deigns to come. exit woman. enter sir politick. sir p: sir i must 
crave your courteous pardon. there hath chanced today unkind disaster 
twixt my lady and me and i was penning my apology to give her 
satisfaction as you came now. per: sir i am grieved i bring you worse 
disaster: the gentleman you met at the port today that told you he was 
newly arrived sir p: ay was a fugitive punk per: no sir a spy set on you 
and he has made relation to the senate that you profest to him to have a 
plot to sell the state of venice to the turk. sir p: o me per: for which 
warrants are signd by this time to apprehend you and to search your 
study for papers sir p: alas sir i have none but notes drawn out of 
playbooks per: all the better sir. sir p: and some essays. what shall i 
do per: sir best convey yourself into a sugarchest or if you could lie 
round a frail were rare: and i could send you aboard. sir p: sir i but 
talkd so for discourse sake merely. knocking within. per: hark they are 
there. sir p: i am a wretch a wretch per: what will you do sir have you 
neer a currantbutt to leap into theyll put you to the rack you must be 
sudden. sir p: sir i have an ingine mer within.: sir politick wouldbe 
mer within.: where is he sir p: that i have thought upon before time. 
per: what is it sir p: i shall neer endure the torture. marry it is sir 
of a tortoiseshell fitted for these extremities: pray you sir help me. 
here ive a place sir to put back my legs please you to lay it on sir 
lies down while peregrine places the shell upon him. with this cap and 
my black gloves. ill lie sir like a tortoise till they are gone. per: 
and call you this an ingine sir p: mine own device good sir bid my wifes 
women to burn my papers. exit peregrine. the three merchants rush in. 
mer: where is he hid mer: we must and will sure find him. mer: which is 
his study reenter peregrine. mer: what are you sir per: i am a merchant 
that came here to look upon this tortoise. mer: how mer: st. mark what 
beast is this per: it is a fish. mer: come out here per: nay you may 
strike him sir and tread upon him hell bear a cart. mer: what to run 
over him per: yes sir. mer: lets jump upon him. mer: can he not go per: 
he creeps sir. mer: lets see him creep. per: no good sir you will hurt 
him. mer: heart i will see him creep or prick his guts. mer: come out 
here per: pray you sir aside to sir politick. creep a little. mer: 
forth. mer: yet farther. per: good sir creep. mer: well see his legs. 
they pull off the shell and discover him. mer: ods so he has garters 
mer: ay and gloves mer: is this your fearful tortoise per discovering 
himself.: now sir pol we are even for your next project i shall be 
prepared: i am sorry for the funeral of your notes sir. mer: twere a 
rare motion to be seen in fleetstreet. mer: ay in the term. mer: or 
smithfield in the fair. mer: methinks tis but a melancholy sight. per: 
farewell most politic tortoise exeunt per. and merchants. reenter 
waitingwoman. sir p: wheres my lady knows she of this wom: i know not 
sir. sir p: enquire. o i shall be the fable of all feasts the freight of 
the gazetti shipboys tale and which is worst even talk for ordinaries. 
wom: my ladys come most melancholy home and says sir she will straight 
to sea for physic. sir p: and i to shun this place and clime for ever 
creeping with house on back: and think it well to shrink my poor head in 
my politic shell. exeunt. scene .. a room in volpones house. enter mosca 
in the habit of a clarissimo and volpone in that of a commandadore. 
volp: am i then like him mos: o sir you are he no man can sever you. 
volp: good. mos: but what am i volp: fore heaven a brave clarissimo thou 
becomst it pity thou wert not born one. mos aside.: if i hold my made 
one twill be well. volp: ill go and see what news first at the court. 
exit. mos: do so. my fox is out of his hole and ere he shall reenter ill 
make him languish in his borrowd case except he come to composition with 
me. androgyno castrone nano enter androgyno castrone and nano. all: 
here. mos: go recreate yourselves abroad go sport. exeunt. so now i have 
the keys and am possest. since he will needs be dead afore his time ill 
bury him or gain by him: i am his heir and so will keep me till he share 
at least. to cozen him of all were but a cheat well placed no man would 
construe it a sin: let his sport pay for it this is calld the foxtrap. 
exit. scene . a street. enter corbaccio and corvino. corb: they say the 
court is set. corv: we must maintain our first tale good for both our 
reputations. corb: why mines no tale: my son would there have killd me. 
corv: thats true i had forgot: aside. mine is i am sure. but for your 
will sir. corb: ay ill come upon him for that hereafter now his patrons 
dead. enter volpone. volp: signior corvino and corbaccio sir much joy 
unto you. corv: of what volp: the sudden good dropt down upon you corb: 
where volp: and none knows how from old volpone sir. corb: out arrant 
knave volp: let not your too much wealth sir make you furious. corb: 
away thou varlet volp: why sir corb: dost thou mock me volp: you mock 
the world sir did you not change wills corb: out harlot volp: o belike 
you are the man signior corvino faith you carry it well you grow not mad 
withal: i love your spirit: you are not overleavend with your fortune. 
you should have some would swell now like a winefat with such an autumn 
did he give you all sir corb: avoid you rascal volp: troth your wife has 
shewn herself a very woman but you are well you need not care you have a 
good estate to bear it out sir better by this chance: except corbaccio 
have a share. corv: hence varlet. volp: you will not be acknown sir why 
tis wise. thus do all gamesters at all games dissemble: no man will seem 
to win. exeunt corvino and corbaccio. here comes my vulture heaving his 
beak up in the air and snuffing. enter voltore. volt: outstript thus by 
a parasite a slave would run on errands and make legs for crumbs well 
what ill do volp: the court stays for your worship. i een rejoice sir at 
your worships happiness and that it fell into so learned hands that 
understand the fingering volt: what do you mean volp: i mean to be a 
suitor to your worship for the small tenement out of reparations that to 
the end of your long row of houses by the piscaria: it was in volpones 
time your predecessor ere he grew diseased a handsome pretty customd 
bawdyhouse as any was in venice none dispraised but fell with him his 
body and that house decayd together. volt: come sir leave your prating. 
volp: why if your worship give me but your hand that i may have the 
refusal i have done. tis a mere toy to you sir candlerents as your 
learnd worship knows volt: what do i know volp: marry no end of your 
wealth sir god decrease it volt: mistaking knave what mockst thou my 
misfortune exit. volp: his blessing on your heart sir would twere more 
now to my first again at the next corner. exit. scene .. another part of 
the street. enter corbaccio and corvino mosca passes over the stage 
before them. corb: see in our habit see the impudent varlet corv: that i 
could shoot mine eyes at him like gunstones. enter volpone. volp: but is 
this true sir of the parasite corb: again to afflict us monster volp: in 
good faith sir im heartily grieved a beard of your grave length should 
be so overreachd. i never brookd that parasites hair methought his nose 
should cozen: there still was somewhat in his look did promise the bane 
of a clarissimo. corb: knave volp: methinks yet you that are so traded 
in the world a witty merchant the fine bird corvino that have such moral 
emblems on your name should not have sung your shame and dropt your 
cheese to let the fox laugh at your emptiness. corv: sirrah you think 
the privilege of the place and your red saucy cap that seems to me naild 
to your jolthead with those two chequines can warrant your abuses come 
you hither: you shall perceive sir i dare beat you approach. volp: no 
haste sir i do know your valour well since you durst publish what you 
are sir. corv: tarry id speak with you. volp: sir sir another time corv: 
nay now. volp: o lord sir i were a wise man would stand the fury of a 
distracted cuckold. as he is running off reenter mosca. corb: what come 
again volp: upon em mosca save me. corb: the airs infected where he 
breathes. corv: lets fly him. exeunt corv. and corb. volp: excellent 
basilisk turn upon the vulture. enter voltore. volt: well fleshfly it is 
summer with you now your winter will come on. mos: good advocate prithee 
not rail nor threaten out of place thus thoult make a solecism as madam 
says. get you a biggin more your brain breaks loose. exit. volt: well 
sir. volp: would you have me beat the insolent slave throw dirt upon his 
first good clothes volt: this same is doubtless some familiar. volp: sir 
the court in troth stays for you. i am mad a mule that never read 
justinian should get up and ride an advocate. had you no quirk to avoid 
gullage sir by such a creature i hope you do but jest he has not done 
it: tis but confederacy to blind the rest. you are the heir. volt: a 
strange officious troublesome knave thou dost torment me. volp: i know 
it cannot be sir that you should be cozend tis not within the wit of man 
to do it you are so wise so prudent and tis fit that wealth and wisdom 
still should go together. exeunt. scene .. the scrutineo or senatehouse. 
enter avocatori notario bonario celia corbaccio corvino commandadori 
saffi etc. avoc: are all the parties here not: all but the advocate. 
avoc: and here he comes. enter voltore and volpone. avoc: then bring 
them forth to sentence. volt: o my most honourd fathers let your mercy 
once win upon your justice to forgive i am distracted volp aside.: what 
will he do now volt: o i know not which to address myself to first 
whether your fatherhoods or these innocents corv aside.: will he betray 
himself volt: whom equally i have abused out of most covetous ends corv: 
the man is mad corb: whats that corv: he is possest. volt: for which now 
struck in conscience here i prostate myself at your offended feet for 
pardon. avoc: arise. cel: o heaven how just thou art volp aside.: i am 
caught in mine own noose corv to corbaccio.: be constant sir: nought now 
can help but impudence. avoc: speak forward. com: silence volt: it is 
not passion in me reverend fathers but only conscience conscience my 
good sires that makes me now tell trueth. that parasite that knave hath 
been the instrument of all. avoc: where is that knave fetch him. volp: i 
go. exit. corv: grave fathers this mans distracted he confest it now: 
for hoping to be old volpones heir who now is dead avoc: how avoc: is 
volpone dead corv: dead since grave fathers bon: o sure vengeance avoc: 
stay then he was no deceiver volt: o no none: the parasite grave 
fathers. corv: he does speak out of mere envy cause the servants made 
the thing he gaped for: please your fatherhoods this is the truth though 
ill not justify the other but he may be somedeal faulty. volt: ay to 
your hopes as well as mine corvino: but ill use modesty. pleaseth your 
wisdoms to view these certain notes and but confer them as i hope favour 
they shall speak clear truth. corv: the devil has enterd him bon: or 
bides in you. avoc: we have done ill by a public officer to send for him 
if he be heir. avoc: for whom avoc: him that they call the parasite. 
avoc: tis true he is a man of great estate now left. avoc: go you and 
learn his name and say the court entreats his presence here but to the 
clearing of some few doubts. exit notary. avoc: this sames a labyrinth 
avoc: stand you unto your first report corv: my state my life my fame 
bon: where is it corv: are at the stake avoc: is yours so too corb: the 
advocates a knave and has a forked tongue avoc: speak to the point. 
corb: so is the parasite too. avoc: this is confusion. volt: i do 
beseech your fatherhoods read but those giving them the papers. corv: 
and credit nothing the false spirit hath writ: it cannot be but hes 
possest grave fathers. the scene closes. scene .. a street. enter 
volpone. volp: to make a snare for mine own neck and run my head into it 
wilfully with laughter when i had newly scaped was free and clear out of 
mere wantonness o the dull devil was in this brain of mine when i 
devised it and mosca gave it second he must now help to sear up this 
vein or we bleed dead. enter nano androgyno and castrone. how now who 
let you loose whither go you now what to buy gingerbread or to drown 
kitlings nan: sir master mosca calld us out of doors and bid us all go 
play and took the keys. and: yes. volp: did master mosca take the keys 
why so im farther in. these are my fine conceits i must be merry with a 
mischief to me what a vile wretch was i that could not bear my fortune 
soberly i must have my crotchets and my conundrums well go you and seek 
him: his meaning may be truer than my fear. bid him he straight come to 
me to the court thither will i and ift be possible unscrew my advocate 
upon new hopes: when i provoked him then i lost myself. exeunt. scene .. 
the scrutineo or senatehouse. avocatori bonario celia corbaccio corvino 
commandadori saffi etc. as before. avoc: these things can neer be 
reconciled. he here shewing the papers. professeth that the gentleman 
was wrongd and that the gentlewoman was brought thither forced by her 
husband and there left. volt: most true. cel: how ready is heaven to 
those that pray avoc: but that volpone would have ravishd her he holds 
utterly false knowing his impotence. corv: grave fathers hes possest 
again i say possest: nay if there be possession and obsession he has 
both. avoc: here comes our officer. enter volpone. volp: the parasite 
will straight be here grave fathers. avoc: you might invent some other 
name sir varlet. avoc: did not the notary meet him volp: not that i 
know. avoc: his coming will clear all. avoc: yet it is misty. volt: mayt 
please your fatherhoods volp whispers volt.: sir the parasite willd me 
to tell you that his master lives that you are still the man your hopes 
the same and this was only a jest volt: how volp: sir to try if you were 
firm and how you stood affected. volt: art sure he lives volp: do i live 
sir volt: o me i was too violent. volp: sir you may redeem it they said 
you were possest fall down and seem so: ill help to make it good. 
voltore falls. god bless the man stop your wind hard and swell: see see 
see see he vomits crooked pins his eyes are set like a dead hares hung 
in a poulters shop his mouths running away do you see signior now it is 
in his belly corv: ay the devil volp: now in his throat. corv: ay i 
perceive it plain. volp: twill out twill out stand clear. see where it 
flies in shape of a blue toad with a bats wings do you not see it sir 
corb: what i think i do. corv: tis too manifest. volp: look he comes to 
himself volt: where am i volp: take good heart the worst is past sir. 
you are dispossest. avoc: what accident is this avoc: sudden and full of 
wonder avoc: if he were possest as it appears all this is nothing. corv: 
he has been often subject to these fits. avoc: shew him that writing: do 
you know it sir volp whispers volt.: deny it sir forswear it know it 
not. volt: yes i do know it well it is my hand but all that it contains 
is false. bon: o practice avoc: what maze is this avoc: is he not guilty 
then whom you there name the parasite volt: grave fathers no more than 
his good patron old volpone. avoc: why he is dead. volt: o no my honourd 
fathers he lives avoc: how lives volt: lives. avoc: this is subtler yet 
avoc: you said he was dead. volt: never. avoc: you said so. corv: i 
heard so. avoc: here comes the gentleman make him way. enter mosca. 
avoc: a stool. avoc aside.: a proper man and were volpone dead a fit 
match for my daughter. avoc: give him way. volp aside to mosca.: mosca i 
was almost lost the advocate had betrayed all but now it is recovered 
alls on the hinge again say i am living. mos: what busy knave is this 
most reverend fathers i sooner had attended your grave pleasures but 
that my order for the funeral of my dear patron did require me volp 
aside.: mosca mos: whom i intend to bury like a gentleman. volp aside.: 
ay quick and cozen me of all. avoc: still stranger more intricate avoc: 
and come about again avoc aside.: it is a match my daughter is bestowd. 
mos aside to volp.: will you give me half volp: first ill be hangd. mos: 
i know your voice is good cry not so loud. avoc: demand the advocate. 
sir did not you affirm volpone was alive volp: yes and he is this 
gentleman told me so. aside to volp. thou shalt have half. mos: whose 
drunkard is this same speak some that know him: i never saw his face. 
aside to volp. i cannot now afford it you so cheap. volp: no avoc: what 
say you volt: the officer told me. volp: i did grave fathers and will 
maintain he lives with mine own life. and that this creature points to 
mosca. told me. aside. i was born with all good stars my enemies. mos: 
most grave fathers if such an insolence as this must pass upon me i am 
silent: twas not this for which you sent i hope. avoc: take him away. 
volp: mosca avoc: let him be whipt. volp: wilt thou betray me cozen me 
avoc: and taught to bear himself toward a person of his rank. avoc: 
away. the officers seize volpone. mos: i humbly thank your fatherhoods. 
volp aside.: soft soft: whipt and lose all that i have if i confess it 
cannot be much more. avoc: sir are you married volp: they will be allied 
anon i must be resolute: the fox shall here uncase. throws off his 
disguise. mos: patron volp: nay now my ruins shall not come alone your 
match ill hinder sure: my substance shall not glue you nor screw you 
into a family. mos: why patron volp: i am volpone and this is my knave 
pointing to mosca. this to volt. his own knave this to corb. avarices 
fool this to corv. a chimera of wittol fool and knave: and reverend 
fathers since we all can hope nought but a sentence lets not now dispair 
it. you hear me brief. corv: may it please your fatherhoods com: 
silence. avoc: the knot is now undone by miracle. avoc: nothing can be 
more clear. avoc: or can more prove these innocent. avoc: give them 
their liberty. bon: heaven could not long let such gross crimes be hid. 
avoc: if this be held the highway to get riches may i be poor avoc: this 
is not the gain but torment. avoc: these possess wealth as sick men 
possess fevers which trulier may be said to possess them. avoc: disrobe 
that parasite. corv mos: most honourd fathers avoc: can you plead aught 
to stay the course of justice if you can speak. corv volt: we beg favour 
cel: and mercy. avoc: you hurt your innocence suing for the guilty. 
stand forth and first the parasite: you appear thave been the chiefest 
minister if not plotter in all these lewd impostures and now lastly have 
with your impudence abused the court and habit of a gentleman of venice 
being a fellow of no birth or blood: for which our sentence is first 
thou be whipt then live perpetual prisoner in our gallies. volt: i thank 
you for him. mos: bane to thy wolvish nature avoc: deliver him to the 
saffi. mosca is carried out. thou volpone by blood and rank a gentleman 
canst not fall under like censure but our judgment on thee is that thy 
substance all be straight confiscate to the hospital of the incurabili: 
and since the most was gotten by imposture by feigning lame gout palsy 
and such diseases thou art to lie in prison crampd with irons till thou 
best sick and lame indeed. remove him. he is taken from the bar. volp: 
this is calld mortifying of a fox. avoc: thou voltore to take away the 
scandal thou hast given all worthy men of thy profession art banishd 
from their fellowship and our state. corbaccio bring him near we here 
possess thy son of all thy state and confine thee to the monastery of 
san spirito where since thou knewest not how to live well here thou 
shalt be learnd to die well. corb: ah what said he and: you shall know 
anon sir. avoc: thou corvino shalt be straight embarkd from thine own 
house and rowd round about venice through the grand canale wearing a cap 
with fair long asses ears instead of horns and so to mount a paper pinnd 
on thy breast to the berlina corv: yes and have mine eyes beat out with 
stinking fish bruised fruit and rotten eggs tis well. i am glad i shall 
not see my shame yet. avoc: and to expiate thy wrongs done to thy wife 
thou art to send her home to her father with her dowry trebled: and 
these are all your judgments. all: honourd fathers. avoc: which may not 
be revoked. now you begin when crimes are done and past and to be 
punishd to think what your crimes are: away with them. let all that see 
these vices thus rewarded take heart and love to study em mischiefs feed 
like beasts till they be fat and then they bleed. exeunt. volpone comes 
forward. volpone: the seasoning of a play is the applause. now though 
the fox be punishd by the laws he yet doth hope there is no suffering 
due for any fact which he hath done gainst you if there be censure him 
here he doubtful stands: if not fare jovially and clap your hands. exit. 
