 _enter_ galeatzo piero alberto antonio forobosco balurdo matzagente 
_and_ feliche _with parts in their hands having cloaks cast over their 
apparel_. _gal._ come sirs come the music will sound straight for 
entrance. are ye ready are ye perfect _pier._ faith we can say our parts 
but we are ignorant in what mould we must cast our actors. _alb._ whom 
do you personate _pier._ piero duke of venice. _alb._ o ho then thus 
frame your exterior shape to haughty form of elate majesty as if you 
held the palsyshaking head of reeling chance under your fortunes belt in 
strictest vassalage: grow big in thought as swoln with glory of 
successful arms. _pier._ if that be all fear not ill suit it right. who 
cannot be proud stroke up the hair and strut _alb._ truth such rank 
custom is grown popular and now the vulgar fashion strides as wide and 
stalks as proud upon the weakest stilts of the slightst fortunes as if 
hercules or burly atlas shoulderd up their state. _pier._ good: but whom 
act you _alb._ the necessity of the play forceth me to act two parts: 
andrugio the distressed duke of genoa and alberto a venetian gentleman 
enamoured on the lady rossaline whose fortunes being too weak to sustain 
the port of her he proved always disastrous in love his worth being much 
underpoised by the uneven scale that currents all things by the outward 
stamp of opinion. _gal._ well and what dost thou play _bal._ the part of 
all the world. _alb._ the part of all the world whats that _bal._ the 
fool. ay in good deed law now i play balurdo a wealthy mountbanking 
burgomascos heir of venice. _alb._ ha ha one whose foppish nature might 
seem great only for wise mens recreation and like a juiceless bark to 
preserve the sap of more strenuous spirits. a servile hound that loves 
the scent of forerunning fashion like an empty hollow vault still giving 
an echo to wit: greedily champing what any other well valued judgment 
had beforehand chewd. _foro._ ha ha ha tolerably good good faith sweet 
wag. _alb._ umph why tolerably good good faith sweet wag go go you 
flatter me. _foro._ right i but dispose my speech to the habit of my 
part. _alb._ why what plays he _to_ feliche. _feli._ the wolf that eats 
into the breasts of princes that breeds the lethargy and falling 
sickness in honour makes justice look asquint and blinds the eye of 
merited reward from viewing desertful virtue. _alb._ whats all this 
periphrasis ha _feli._ the substance of a supplechapt flatterer. _alb._ 
o doth he play forobosco the parasite good ifaith. sirrah you must seem 
now as glib and straight in outward semblance as a ladys busk though 
inwardly as cross as a pair of tailors legs having a tongue as nimble as 
his needle with servile patches of glavering flattery to stitch up the 
bracks of unworthily honourd _foro._ i warrant you i warrant you you 
shall see me prove the very periwig to cover the bald pate of brainless 
gentility. ho i will so tickle the sense of _bella gratiosa madonna_ 
with the titillation of hyperbolical praise that ill strike it in the 
nick in the very nick chuck. _feli._ thou promisest more than i hope any 
spectator gives faith of performance but why look you so dusky ha _to_ 
antonio. _ant._ i was never worse fitted since the nativity of my 
actorship i shall be hissd at on my life now. _feli._ why what must you 
play _ant._ faith i know not what an hermaphrodite two parts in one my 
true person being antonio son to the duke of genoa though for the love 
of mellida pieros daughter i take this feigned presence of an amazon 
calling myself florizell and i know not what. i a voice to play a lady i 
shall neer do it. _alb._ o an amazon should have such a voice 
viragolike. not play two parts in one away away tis common fashion. nay 
if you cannot bear two subtle fronts under one hood idiot go by go by 
off this worlds stage o times impurity _ant._ ay but when use hath 
taught me action to hit the right point of a ladys part i shall grow 
ignorant when i must turn young prince again how but to truss my hose. 
_feli._ tush never put them off for women wear the breeches still. 
_mat._ by the bright honour of a milanoise and the resplendent fulgor of 
this steel i will defend the feminine to death and ding his spirit to 
the verge of hell that dares divulge a ladys prejudice _exeunt_ 
matzagente forobosco _and_ balurdo. _feli._ rampum scrampum mount tufty 
tamburlaine what rattling thunderclap breaks from his lips _alb._ o tis 
native to his part. for acting a modern braggadoch under the person of 
matzagente the duke of milans son it may seem to suit with good fashion 
of coherence. _pier._ but methinks he speaks with a spruce attic accent 
of adulterate spanish. _alb._ so tis resolvd. for milan being half 
spanish half high dutch and half italians the blood of chiefest houses 
is corrupt and mongreld so that you shall see a fellow vainglorious for 
a spaniard gluttonous for a dutchman proud for an italian and a 
fantastic idiot for all. such a one conceit this matzagente. _feli._ but 
i have a part allotted me which i have neither able apprehension to 
conceit nor what i conceit gracious ability to utter. _gal._ whoop in 
the old cut good show us a draught of thy spirit. _feli._ tis steady and 
must seem so impregnably fortressed with his own content that no envious 
thought could ever invade his spirit never surveying any man so 
unmeasuredly happy whom i thought not justly hateful for some true 
impoverishment never beholding any favour of madam felicity gracing 
another which his wellbounded content persuaded not to hang in the front 
of his own fortune and therefore as far from envying any man as he 
valued all men infinitely distant from accomplished beatitude. these 
native adjuncts appropriate to me the name of feliche. but last good thy 
humour. _exeunt_ piero alberto _and_ galeatzo. _ant._ tis to be 
described by signs and tokens. for unless i were possessed with a legion 
of spirits tis impossible to be made perspicuous by any utterance: for 
sometimes he must take austere state as for the person of galeatzo the 
son of the duke of florence and possess his exterior presence with a 
formal majesty: keep popularity in distance and on the sudden fling his 
honour so prodigally into a common arm that he may seem to give up his 
indiscretion to the mercy of vulgar censure. now as solemn as a 
traveller and as grave as a puritans ruff with the same breath as slight 
and scattered in his fashion as a a anything now as sweet and neat as a 
barbers castingbottle straight as slovenly as the yeasty breast of an 
aleknight: now lamenting then chafing straight laughing then . _feli._ 
what then _ant._ faith i know not what t had been a right part for 
proteus or gew. ho blind gew would ha done t rarely rarely. _feli._ i 
fear it is not possible to limn so many persons in so small a tablet as 
the compass of our plays afford. _ant._ right therefore i have heard 
that those persons as he and you feliche that are but slightly drawn in 
this comedy should receive more exact accomplishment in a second part 
which if this obtain gracious acceptance means to try his fortune. 
_feli._ peace here comes the prologue: clear the stage. _exeunt._ we 
have an induction before _what you will_ and _the malcontent_. ben 
jonson was particularly fond of introducing preliminary dialogues which 
are usually so tedious that we are fain to exclaim with cordatus in the 
induction to _every man out of his humour_ i would they would begin once 
this protraction is able to sour the best settled patience in the 
theatre. _i.e._ the poverty of the theatrical company. it was common for 
an actor to represent two characters or more in the same play. for 
example william shurlock personated maharbal and prusias in nabbes 
_hannibal and scipio_ and in the same play hugh clerke besides taking 
the part of syphax personated the nuntius. old eds. shewd. so ed. . the 
to gives blinks. a piece of whalebone steel or wood worn down the front 
of the stays to keep them straight. rents cracks. truss my hose tie the 
tagged laces of my breeches. hurl violently. old eds. _exeunt_ ant. 
_and_ alb. common worthless. the use of modern in this sense is 
frequently found and was sanctioned by shakespeare but it did not escape 
ben jonsons censure in _the poetaster_ v. i.: alas that were no _modern_ 
consequence to have cothurnal buskins frightened hence. the old cut the 
old fashion. so nashe in the epistle dedicatory prefixed to _strange 
news of the intercepting certain letters_ : you are amongst grave 
doctors and men of judgment in both laws every day. i pray ask them the 
question in my absence whether such a man as i have described this 
epistler to be ... that hath made many proper rhymes of the _old cut_ in 
his days c. old eds. _exit_ alb. jaques in _as you like it_ describing 
his own melancholy says it is extracted from many objects and that the 
contemplation of his travels often wraps him in a most humorous sadness: 
on which rosalind observes a traveller by my faith you have great reason 
to be sad _dilke._ the puritans short starched ruffs were constantly 
ridiculed. see middletons _works_ viii. . a bottle for sprinkling 
perfumes. probably an actor who had gone blind but i can find no 
information about him. the prologue. the wreath of pleasure and 
delicious sweets begirt the gentle front of this fair troop select and 
most respected auditors for wits sake do not dream of miracles. alas we 
shall but falter if you lay the least sad weight of an unusd hope upon 
our weakness only we give up the worthless present of slight idleness to 
your authentic censure. o that our muse had those abstruse and sinewy 
faculties that with a strain of fresh invention she might press out the 
rarity of art the purst elixd juice of rich conceit in your attentive 
ears that with the lip of gracious elocution we might drink a sound 
carouse into your health of wit. but o the heavy dryness of her brain 
foil to your fertile spirits is ashamd to breathe her blushing numbers 
to such ears. yet most ingenious deign to veil our wants with sleek 
acceptance polish these rude scenes and if our slightness your large 
hope beguiles check not with bended brow but dimpled smiles. _exit_ 
prologue. so ed. . ed. heathy. the first part of antonio and mellida. 
act i. scene i. _neighbourhood of venice._ _the cornets sound a battle 
within._ _enter_ antonio _disguised like an amazon_. _ant._ heart wilt 
not break and thou abhorrd life wilt thou still breathe in my enragd 
blood veins sinews arteries why crack ye not burst and divulst with 
anguish of my grief can man by no means creep out of himself and leave 
the slough of viperous grief behind antonio hast thou seen a fight at 
sea as horrid as the hideous day of doom betwixt thy father duke of 
genoa and proud piero the venetian prince: in which the sea hath swoln 
with genoas blood and made springtides with the warm reeking gore that 
gushd from out our galleys scupperholes in which thy father poor 
andrugio lies sunk or leapd into the arms of chance choked with the 
labouring oceans brackish foam who even despite pieros cankerd hate 
would with an armd hand have seized thy love and linkd thee to the 
beauteous mellida. have i outlived the death of all these hopes have i 
felt anguish pourd into my heart burning like balsamum in tender wounds 
and yet dost live could not the fretting sea have rolld me up in 
wrinkles of his brow is death grown coy or grim confusion nice that it 
will not accompany a wretch but i must needs be cast on venice shore and 
try new fortunes with this strange disguise to purchase my adord mellida 
_the cornets sound a flourish cease._ hark how pieros triumphs beat the 
air o rugged mischief how thou gratst my heart take spirit blood 
disguise be confident make a firm stand here rests the hope of all: 
lower than hell there is no depth to fall. _the cornets sound a senet. 
enter_ feliche _and_ alberto castilio _and_ forobosco _a_ page _carrying 
a shield_ piero _in armour_ catzo _and_ dildo _and_ balurdo. _all these_ 
_saving_ piero _armed with petronels_. _being entered they make a stand 
in divided files_. _pier._ victorious fortune with triumphant hand 
hurleth my glory bout this ball of earth whilst the venetian duke is 
heavd up on wings of fair success to overlook the lowcast ruins of his 
enemies to see myself adored and genoa quake my fate is firmer than 
mischance can shake. _feli._ stand the ground trembleth. _pier._ ha an 
earthquake _bal._ o i smell a sound. _feli._ piero stay for i descry a 
fume creeping from out the bosom of the deep the breath of darkness 
fatal when tis wist in greatness stomach. this same smoke calld pride 
take heed: shell lift thee to improvidence and break thy neck from steep 
security shell make thee grudge to let jehovah share in thy successful 
battles. o shes ominous enticeth princes to devour heaven swallow 
omnipotence outstare dread fate subdue eternity in giant thought heaves 
up their heart with swelling puffd conceit till their souls burst with 
venomd arrogance. beware piero rome itself hath tried confusions train 
blows up this babel pride. _pier._ pish _dimitto superos summa votorum 
attigi._ alberto hast thou yielded up our fixd decree unto the genoan 
ambassador are they content if that their duke return to send his and 
his son antonios head as pledges steepd in blood to gain their peace 
_alb._ with most obsequious sleekbrowd entertain they all embrace it as 
most gracious. _pier._ are proclamations sent through italy that 
whosoever brings andrugios head or young antonios shall be guerdond with 
twenty thousand double pistolets and be endeard to pieros love _foro._ 
they are sent every way: sound policy sweet lord. _feli._ _aside._ 
confusion to these limber sycophants no sooner mischiefs born in regency 
but flattery christens it with policy. _pier._ why then _o me coelitum 
excelsissimum_ the intestine malice and inveterate hate i always bore to 
that andrugio glories in triumph oer his misery nor shall that carpetboy 
antonio match with my daughter sweetcheekd mellida. no the public power 
makes my faction strong. _feli._ ill when public power strengthneth 
private wrong. _pier._ tis horselike not for man to know his force. 
_feli._ tis godlike for a man to feel remorse. _pier._ pish i prosecute 
my familys revenge which ill pursue with such a burning chase till i 
have dried up all andrugios blood weak rage that with slight pity is 
withstood. _the cornets sound a flourish._ what means that fresh 
triumphal flourish sound _alb._ the prince of milan and young florence 
heir approach to gratulate your victory. _pier._ well girt them with an 
ample waste of love. conduct them to our presence royally let vollies of 
the great artillery from off our galleys banks play prodigal and sound 
loud welcome from their bellowing mouths. _exeunt all but_ piero. _the 
cornets sound a senet. enter above_ mellida rossaline _and_ flavia. 
_enter below_ galeatzo _with attendants_ piero _meeteth him embraceth at 
which the cornets sound a flourish_ piero _and_ galeatzo _exeunt the 
rest stand still_. _mel._ what prince was that passed through my fathers 
guard _fla._ twas galeatzo the young florentine. _ros._ troth one that 
will besiege thy maidenhead enter the walls ifaith sweet mellida if that 
thy flankers be not cannonproof. _mel._ o mary ambree good thy judgment 
wench thy bright elections clear: what will he prove _ros._ hath a short 
finger and a naked chin a skipping eye dare lay my judgment faith his 
love is glibbery theres no hold ont wench. give me a husband whose 
aspect is firm a fullcheekd gallant with a bouncing thigh: o he is the 
_paradizo dell madonne contento_. _mel._ even such a one was my antonio. 
_the cornets sound a senet._ _ros._ by my nine and thirtieth servant 
sweet thou art in love but stand on tiptoe fair here comes saint 
tristram tirlery whiffe ifaith. _enter_ matzagente piero _meets him 
embraceth at which the cornets sound a flourish: they two stand using 
seeming compliments whilst the scene passeth above_. _mel._ st. mark st. 
mark what kind of thing appears _ros._ for fancys passion spit upon him 
fie his face is varnishd. in the name of love what country bred that 
creature _mel._ what is he flavia _fla._ the heir of milan signior 
matzagente. _ros._ matzagente now by my pleasures hope he is made like a 
tiltingstaff and looks for all the world like an oerroasted pig: a great 
tobaccotaker too thats flat for his eyes look as if they had been hung 
in the smoke of his nose. _mel._ what husband will he prove sweet 
rossaline _ros._ avoid him for he hath a dwindled leg a low forehead and 
a thin coalblack beard and will be jealous too believe it sweet for his 
chin sweats and hath a gander neck a thin lip and a little monkish eye. 
precious what a slender waist he hath he looks like a maypole or a 
notched stick hell snap in two at every little strain. give me a husband 
that will fill mine arms of steady judgment quick and nimble sense fools 
relish not a ladys excellence. _exeunt all on the lower stage at which 
the cornets sound a flourish and a peal of shot is given._ _mel._ the 
triumphs ended but look rossaline what gloomy soul in strange 
accustrements walks on the pavement _ros._ good sweet lets to her 
prithee mellida. _mel._ how covetous thou art of novelties _ros._ pish 
tis our nature to desire things that are thought strangers to the common 
cut. _mel._ i am exceeding willing but _ros._ but what prithee go down 
lets see her face: god send that neither wit nor beauty wants those 
tempting sweets affections adamants. _exeunt._ _ant._ come down: she 
comes like o no simile is precious choice or elegant enough to 
illustrate her descent leap heart she comes she comes smile heaven and 
softest southern wind kiss her cheek gently with perfumd breath. she 
comes creations purity admird adord amazing rarity she comes o now 
antonio press thy spirit forth in following passion knit thy senses 
close heap up thy powers double all thy man. _enter_ mellida rossaline 
_and_ flavia. she comes o how her eyes dart wonder on my heart mount 
blood soul to my lips taste hebes cup: stand firm on deck when beautys 
close fights up. _mel._ lady your strange habit doth beget our pregnant 
thoughts even great of much desire to be acquaint with your condition. 
_ros._ good sweet lady without more ceremonies what country claims your 
birth and sweet your name _ant._ in hope your bounty will extend itself 
in selfsame nature of fair courtesy ill shun all niceness my names 
florizell my country scythia i am amazon cast on this shore by fury of 
the sea. _ros._ nay faith sweet creature well not veil our names. it 
pleasd the font to dip me rossaline that lady bears the name of mellida 
the duke of venice daughter. _ant._ madam i am obligd to kiss your hand 
by imposition of a now dead man. _to_ mellida _kissing her hand_. _ros._ 
now by my troth i long beyond all thought to know the man sweet beauty 
deign his name. _ant._ lady the circumstance is tedious. _ros._ troth 
not a whit good fair lets have it all: i love not i to have a jot left 
out if the tale come from a loved orator. _ant._ vouchsafe me then your 
hushd observances. vehement in pursuit of strange novelties after long 
travel through the asian main i shippd my hopeful thoughts for brittany 
longing to view great natures miracle the glory of our sex whose fame 
doth strike remotest ears with adoration. sailing some two months with 
inconstant winds we viewd the glistering venetian forts to which we 
made: when lo some three leagues off we might descry a horrid spectacle 
the issue of black fury strewd the sea with tatterd carcasses of 
splitted ships half sinking burning floating topsyturvy. not far from 
these sad ruins of fell rage we might behold a creature press the waves 
senseless he sprawld all notchd with gaping wounds. to him we made and 
short we took him up the first thing he spake was mellida and then he 
swooned. _mel._ ay me _ant._ why sigh you fair _mel._ nothing but little 
humours good sweet on. _ant._ his wounds being dressd and life recoverd 
we gan discourse when lo the sea grew mad his bowels rumbling with 
windpassion straight swarthy darkness poppd out phoebus eye and blurrd 
the jocund face of brightcheekd day whilst crudled fogs masked even 
darkness brow: heaven bads good night and the rocks groand at the 
intestine uproar of the main. now gusty flaws strook up the very heels 
of our mainmast whilst the keen lightning shot through the black bowels 
of the quaking air straight chops a wave and in his sliftred paunch down 
falls our ship and there he breaks his neck which in an instant up was 
belkt again. when thus this martyrd soul began to sigh: give me your 
hand quoth he: now do you grasp th unequalld mirror of raggd misery: ist 
not a horrid storm o wellshaped sweet could your quick eye strike 
through these gashd wounds you should behold a heart a heart fair 
creature raging more wild than is this frantic sea. wolt do me a favour 
if thou chance survive but visit venice kiss the precious white of my 
most nay all epithets are base to attribute to gracious mellida: tell 
her the spirit of antonio wisheth his last gasp breathd upon her breast. 
_ros._ why weeps softhearted florizell _ant._ alas the flinty rocks 
groand at his plaints. tell her quoth he that her obdurate sire hath 
crackd his bosom therewithal he wept and thus sighd on: the sea is 
merciful look how it gapes to bury all my grief well thou shalt have it 
thou shalt be his tomb: my faith in my love live in thee die woe die 
unmatchd anguish die antonio with that he totterd from the reeling deck 
and down he sunk. _ros._ pleasures body what makes my lady weep _mel._ 
nothing sweet rossaline but the airs sharp my fathers palace madam will 
be proud to entertain your presence if youll deign to make repose 
within. ay me _ant._ lady our fashion is not curious. _ros._ faith all 
the nobler tis more generous. _mel._ shall i then know how fortune fell 
at last what succour came or what strange fate ensued _ant._ most 
willingly: but this same court is vast and public to the staring 
multitude. _ros._ sweet lady nay good sweet now by my troth well be 
bedfellows: dirt on compliment froth _exeunt_ rossaline _giving_ antonio 
_the way_. carbines. ed. heavens. old eds. hurt. senec. _thyestes_ . 
christens it with policy dignifies it with the title of policy. a term 
of contempt like carpetknight for an effeminate gallant who never 
charged beyond a mistress lips. pity. the rowers benches. the famous 
amazon whose valorous acts performed at gaunt ghent circ. are celebrated 
in a fine old ballad. the name was commonly applied to any woman of 
spirit. thy bright elections clear you are a woman of keen perception. a 
favourite word with marston. it is ridiculed by ben jonson in _the 
poetaster_ v. : what shall thy lubrical and _glibbery_ muse live as she 
were defunct like punk in stews old eds. tiptoed. it was a common form 
of abuse to compare a person to a maypole. hermia railing at helena 
addresses her as thou painted maypole _midsummer nights dream_ iii. . 
accoutrements. elsewhere marston has the original french form 
accoustrements which is also found in spenser. _close fight_ is an old 
seaterm. a ships _close fights_ are small ledges of wood laid cross one 
another like the grates of iron in a prison window betwixt the mainmast 
and foremast and are called gratings or nettings. smiths _sea grammar_ . 
_halliwell._ the form brittany for britain is not uncommon. marlowe uses 
it in _edward ii._ ii. . l. and i have restored it _metri causa_ in the 
prologue to the _jew of malta_ l. . ed. swounded. old eds. _ros._ thick 
curdled. cleft rifted. old eds. unequal which dilke explains to mean the 
partial and unjust representative an explanation which i wholly fail to 
understand. later in the present play p. l. we have _unmatchd mirrors_ 
of calamity. wilt. dilke quotes appositely from _richard ii._: _rich._ 
and say what store of parting tears were shed _aum._ faith none by me: 
except _the northeast wind_ which then blew bitterly against our faces 
_awakd the sleepy rheum_ and so by chance did grace our hollow parting 
with a tear. our fashion is not curious _i.e._ amazons do not stand on 
ceremony. rossaline seeing antonio make way for her to pass insists on 
giving him precedence. no empty compliments take the lead. act ii. scene 
i. _palace of the duke of venice._ _enter_ catzo _with a capon eating_ 
dildo _following him_. _dil._ hah catzo your master wants a clean 
trencher: do you hear balurdo calls for your diminutive attendance. 
_cat._ the belly hath no ears dildo. _dil._ good pug give me some capon. 
_cat._ no capon no not a bit ye smooth bully capons no meat for dildo: 
milk milk ye glibbery urchin is food for infants. _dil._ upon mine 
honour. _cat._ your honour with a paugh slid now every jackanapes loads 
his back with the golden coat of honour every ass puts on the lions skin 
and roars his honour. upon your honour by my ladys pantable i fear i 
shall live to hear a vintners boy cry tis rich neat canary. upon my 
honour _dil._ my stomachs up. _cat._ i think thou art hungry. _dil._ the 
match of fury is lighted fastened to the linstock of rage and will 
presently set fire to the touchhole of intemperance discharging the 
double culverin of my incensement in the face of thy opprobrious speech. 
_cat._ ill stop the barrel thus: good dildo set not fire to the 
touchhole. _dil._ my rage is stoppd and i will eat to the health of the 
fool thy master castilio. _cat._ and i will suck the juice of the capon 
to the health of the idiot thy master balurdo. _dil._ faith our masters 
are like a case of rapiers sheathed in one scabbard of folly. _cat._ 
right dutch blades. but wast not rare sport at the seabattle whilst 
rounce robble hobble roared from the shipsides to view our masters pluck 
their plumes and drop their feathers for fear of being men of mark. 
_dil._ slud cried signior balurdo o for don rosicleers armour in the 
_mirror of knighthood_ what coils here o for an armour cannonproof o 
more cable more featherbeds more featherbeds more cable till he had as 
much as my cablehatband to fence him. _enter_ flavia _in haste with a 
rebato_. _cat._ buxom flavia can you sing song song _fla._ my sweet 
dildo i am not for you at this time: madam rossaline stays for a fresh 
ruff to appear in the presence: sweet away. _dil._ twill not be so put 
off delicate delicious sparkeyed sleekskinnd slenderwaisted cleanleggd 
rarelyshaped _fla._ who ill be at all your service another season: my 
faith theres reason in all things. _dil._ would i were reason then that 
i might be in all things. _cat._ the breve and the semiquaver is we must 
have the descant you made upon our names ere you depart. _fla._ faith 
the song will seem to come off hardly. _cat._ troth not a wit if you 
seem to come off quickly. _fla._ pert catzo knock it lustily then. _a 
song._ _enter_ forobosco _with two torches_: castilio _singing 
fantastically_ rossaline _running a coranto pace and_ balurdo feliche 
_following wondering at them all_. _foro._ make place gentlemen pages 
hold torches the prince approacheth the presence. _dil._ what squeaking 
cartwheel have we here ha make place gentlemen pages hold torches the 
prince approacheth the presence. _ros._ faugh what a strong scents here 
somebody useth to wear socks. _bal._ by this fair candle light tis not 
my feet i never wore socks since i sucked pap. _ros._ savourly put off. 
_cast._ hah her wit stings blisters galls off the skin with the tart 
acrimony of her sharp quickness: by sweetness she is the very pallas 
that flew out of jupiters brainpan. delicious creature vouchsafe me your 
service: by the purity of bounty i shall be proud of such bondage. 
_ros._ i vouchsafe it be my slave. signior balurdo wilt thou be my 
servant too _bal._ o god forsooth in very good earnest law you would 
make me as a man should say as a man should say _feli._ slud sweet 
beauty will you deign him your service _ros._ o your fool is your only 
servant. but good feliche why art thou so sad a penny for thy thought 
man. _feli._ i sell not my thought so cheap: i value my meditation at a 
higher rate. _bal._ in good sober sadness sweet mistress you should have 
had my thought for a penny: by this crimson satin that cost eleven 
shillings thirteen pence three pence halfpenny a yard that you should 
law _ros._ what was thy thought good servant _bal._ marry forsooth how 
many strike of pease would feed a hog fat against christtide. _ros._ 
paugh _she spits_ servant rub out my rheum it soils the presence. 
_cast._ by my wealthiest thought you grace my shoe with an unmeasured 
honour: i will preserve the sole of it as a most sacred relic for this 
service. _ros._ ill spit in thy mouth and thou wilt to grace thee. 
_feli._ _aside._ o that the stomach of this queasy age digests or brooks 
such raw unseasoned gobs and vomits not them forth o slavish sots 
servant quoth you faugh if a dog should crave and beg her service he 
should have it straight: shed give him favours too to lick her feet or 
fetch her fan or some such drudgery: a good dogs office which these 
amorists triumph of: tis rare well give her more ass more sot as long as 
dropping of her nose is sworn rich pearl by such low slaves as those. 
_ros._ flavia attend me to attire me. _exeunt_ rossaline _and_ flavia. 
_bal._ in sad good earnest sir you have touched the very bare of naked 
truth my silk stocking hath a good gloss and i thank my planets my leg 
is not altogether unpropitiously shaped. theres a word: unpropitiously i 
think i shall speak unpropitiously as well as any courtier in italy. 
_foro._ so help me your sweet bounty you have the most graceful presence 
applausive elecuty amazing volubility polishd adornation delicious 
affability. _feli._ whoop: fut how he tickles yon trout under the gills 
you shall see him take him by and by with groping flattery. _foro._ that 
ever ravishd the ear of wonder. by your sweet self than whom i know not 
a more exquisite illustrate accomplished pure respected adored observed 
precious real magnanimous bounteous if you have an idle rich cast jerkin 
or so it shall not be cast away if ha heres a forehead an eye a head a 
hair that would make a : or if you have any spare pair of silver spurs 
ill do you as much right in all kind offices _feli._ _aside._ of a kind 
parasite. _foro._ as any of my mean fortunes shall be able to. _bal._ as 
i am true christian now thou hast won the spurs. _feli._ _aside._ for 
flattery. o how i hate that same egyptian louse a rotten maggot that 
lives by stinking filth of tainted spirits vengeance to such dogs that 
sprout by gnawing senseless carrion _enter_ alberto. _alb._ gallants saw 
you my mistress the lady rossaline _foro._ my mistress the lady 
rossaline left the presence even now. _cast._ my mistress the lady 
rossaline withdrew her gracious aspect even now. _bal._ my mistress the 
lady rossaline withdrew her gracious aspect even now. _feli._ _aside._ 
well said echo. _alb._ my mistress and his mistress and your mistress 
and the dogs mistress. precious dear heaven that alberto lives to have 
such rivals slid i have been searching every private room corner and 
secret angle of the court: and yet and yet and yet she lives conceald. 
good sweet feliche tell me how to find my brightfaced mistress out. 
_feli._ why man cry out for lanthorn and candlelight: for tis your only 
way to find your brightflaming wench with your lightburning torch: for 
most commonly these light creatures live in darkness. _alb._ away you 
heretic youll be burnt for _feli._ go you amorous hound follow the scent 
of your mistress shoe away _foro._ make a fair presence boys advance 
your lights the princess makes approach. _bal._ and please the gods now 
in very good deed law you shall see me tickle the measures for the 
heavens. do my hangers show _enter_ piero antonio mellida rossaline 
galeatzo matzagente alberto _and_ flavia. _as they enter_ feliche _and_ 
castilio _make a rank for the_ duke _to pass through_. forobosco _ushers 
the_ duke _to his state_: _then whilst_ piero _speaketh his first 
speech_ mellida _is taken by_ galeatzo _and_ matzagente _to dance they 
supporting her_: rossaline _in like manner by_ alberto _and_ balurdo: 
flavia _by_ feliche _and_ castilio. _pier._ beauteous amazon sit and 
seat your thoughts in the reposure of most soft content. sound music 
there nay daughter clear your eyes from these dull fogs of misty 
discontent: look sprightly girl. what though antonios drownd that 
peevish dotard on thy excellence that hated issue of andrugio yet mayst 
thou triumph in my victories since lo the highborn bloods of italy sue 
for thy seat of love. let music sound beauty and youth run descant on 
loves ground. _mat._ lady erect your gracious symmetry shine in the 
sphere of sweet affection: your eyes as heavy as the heart of night. 
_mel._ my thoughts are as black as your beard my fortunes as 
illproportioned as your legs and all the powers of my mind as leaden as 
your wit and as dusty as your face is swarthy. _gal._ faith sweet ill 
lay thee on the lips for that jest. _mel._ i prithee intrude not on a 
dead mans right. _gal._ no but the livings just possession: thy lips and 
love are mine. _mel._ you neer took seizin on them yet: forbear. theres 
not a vacant corner of my heart but all is filld with dead antonios 
loss. then urge no more o leave to love at all tis less disgraceful not 
to mount than fall. _mat._ bright and refulgent lady deign your ear: you 
see this blade had it a courtly lip it would divulge my valour plead my 
love justle that skipping feeble amorist out of your loves seat i am 
matzagent. _gal._ hark thee i pray thee taint not thy sweet ear with 
that sots gabble by thy beauteous cheek he is the flaggingst bulrush 
that eer droopd with each slight mist of rain. but with pleased eye 
smile on my courtship. _mel._ what said you sir alas my thought was fixd 
upon another object. good forbear: i shall but weep. ay me what boots a 
tear come come lets dance. o music thou distillst more sweetness in us 
than this jarring world: both time and measure from thy strains do 
breathe whilst from the channel of this dirt doth flow nothing but 
timeless grief unmeasured woe. _ant._ o how impatience cramps my crackd 
veins and cruddles thick my blood with boiling rage o eyes why leap you 
not like thunderbolts or cannon bullets in my rivals face _ohime 
infeliche misero o lamentevol fato_ _alb._ what means the lady fall upon 
the ground _ros._ belike the falling sickness. _ant._ i cannot brook 
this sight my thoughts grow wild: here lies a wretch on whom heaven 
never smiled. _ros._ what servant neer a word and i here man i would 
shoot some speech forth to strike the time with pleasing touch of 
amorous compliment. say sweet what keeps thy mind what thinkst thou on 
_alb._ nothing. _ros._ whats that nothing _alb._ a womans constancy. 
_ros._ good why wouldst thou have us sluts and never shift the vesture 
of our thoughts away for shame. _alb._ o no thart too constant to 
afflict my heart too too firm fixd in unmovd scorn. _ros._ pish pish i 
fixed in unmovd scorn why ill love thee tonight. _alb._ but whom 
tomorrow _ros._ faith as the toy puts me in the head. _bal._ and pleased 
the marble heavens now would i might be the toy to put you in the head 
kindly to conceit my my my pray you give in an epithet for love. _feli._ 
roaring roaring. _bal._ o love thou hast murderd me made me a shadow and 
you hear not balurdo but balurdos ghost. _ros._ can a ghost speak _bal._ 
scurvily as i do. _ros._ and walk _bal._ after their fashion. _ros._ and 
eat apples _bal._ in a sort in their garb. _feli._ prithee flavia be my 
mistress. _fla._ your reason good feliche _feli._ faith i have nineteen 
mistresses already and i not much disdain that thou shouldst make up the 
full score. _fla._ o i hear you make commonplaces of your mistresses to 
perform the office of memory by. pray you in ancient times were not 
those satin hose in good faith now they are new dyed pinkd and scoured 
they show as well as if they were new. what mute balurdo _feli._ ay in 
faith and twere not for printing and painting my breech and your face 
would be out of reparation. _bal._ ay in faith and twere not for 
printing and painting my breech and your face would be out of 
reparation. _feli._ good again echo. _fla._ thou art by nature too foul 
to be affected. _feli._ and thou by art too fair to be beloved. by wits 
life most spark spirits but hard chance. _la ty dine._ _pier._ gallants 
the night grows old and downy sleep courts us to entertain his company: 
our tird limbs bruisd in the morning fight entreat soft rest and gentle 
hushd repose. fill out greek wines prepare fresh cressitlight: well have 
a banquet: princes then goodnight. _the cornets sound a senet and the_ 
duke _goes out in state_. _as they are going out_ antonio _stays_ 
mellida: _the rest exeunt_. _ant._ what means these scatterd looks why 
tremble you why quake your thoughts in your distracted eyes collect your 
spirits madam what do you see dost not behold a ghost look look where he 
stalks wrapt up in clouds of grief darting his soul upon thy wondring 
eyes. look he comes towards thee see he stretcheth out his wretched arms 
to gird thy loved waist with a most wishd embrace: seest him not yet nor 
yet ha mellida thou well mayst err: for look he walks not like antonio: 
like that antonio that this morning shone in glistering habiliments of 
arms to seize his love spite of her fathers spite: but like himself 
wretched and miserable banishd forlorn despairing strook quite through 
with sinking grief rolled up in sevenfold doubles of plagues 
unvanquishable: hark he speaks to thee. _mel._ alas i cannot hear nor 
see him. _ant._ why all this night about the room he stalkd and groand 
and howld with raging passion to view his love lifeblood of all his 
hopes crown of his fortune clippd by strangers arms. look but behind 
thee. _mel._ o antonio my lord my love my _ant._ leave passion sweet for 
time place air and earth are all our foes: fear and be jealous fair lets 
fly. _mel._ dear heart ha whither _ant._ o tis no matter whither but 
lets fly. ha now i think ont i have neer a home no father friend or 
country to embrace these wretched limbs: the world the all that is is 
all my foe: a prince not worth a doit: only my head is hoisd to high 
rate worth twenty thousand double pistolets to him that can but strike 
it from these shoulders. but come sweet creature thou shalt be my home 
my father country riches and my friend my all my soul and thou and i 
will live lets think like what and you and i will live like unmatchd 
mirrors of calamity. the jealous ear of night eavedrops our talk. hold 
thee theres a jewel and look thee theres a note that will direct thee 
when where how to fly. bid me adieu. _mel._ farewell bleak misery _ant._ 
stay sweet lets kiss before you go _mel._ farewell dear soul _ant._ 
farewell my life my heart _exeunt._ a proverbial expression: gastr tas 
ouk echei. a familiar form of address. slipper. the stick which held the 
gunners match. case of rapiers pair of rapiers. all the editions give 
bessiclers but this is evidently a misprint. rosicleer was the brother 
of the knight of the sun and he figures prominently in the group of 
romances published under the _mirror of knighthood_ pts. . he had an 
excellent suit of armour which proved very serviceable in his combats 
with giants. dilke in says that featherbeds were still used to protect 
the men from the fire of the enemy. as to the use of cables i refer the 
reader to sir william monsons _naval tracts_ _collection of voyages and 
travels_ iii. where in the directions how to preserve the men in 
fighting it is stated: i prefer the coiling of cables on the deck and 
keeping part of the men within them... for the soldiers are in and out 
speedily upon all sudden occasions to succour any part of the ship or to 
enter an enemy without trouble to the sailors in handling their sails or 
to the gunners in playing their ordnance. a twisted band worn round the 
hat. in _every man out of his humour_ the cablehatband is mentioned as a 
novelty of the latest fashion: i had on a gold cable hatband _then new 
come up_. ruff fallingband. so in _king henry viii._: let the music 
knock it. _dilke._ a quick lively dance. the exclamation was too 
fashionable in the time of marston for those who had nothing else to say 
and is ridiculed by ben jonson in the character of orange in _every man 
out of his humour_ as o lord sir is by shakespeare in _alls well that 
ends well_. orange is thus described: tis as dry an orange as ever grew: 
nothing but salutation and o god sir and it please you to say so sir. 
_dilke._ lover suitor. regal noble. in the address to those that seem 
judicial observers prefixed to the _scourge of villainy_ marston 
ridicules ben jonson under the name of torquatus for introducing 
newminted epithets as _real_ intrinsecate delphic. lanthorn and 
candlelight the bellmans cry. loops or straps fastened to the girdle in 
which the rapier was suspended. throne chair of dignity. let music sound 
is printed as a stagedirection in the old copies. musical term for an 
air on which variations or divisions were to be made. the words o love 
... balurdos ghost are given to feliche in old eds. there is the same 
joke in the _merry jests of george peele_ : george used often to an 
ordinary in this town where a kinswoman of the good wifes in the house 
held a great pride and vain opinion of her own motherwit for her tongue 
was a jack continually wagging.... now this titmouse what she scanted by 
nature she doth replenish by art as her boxes of red and white daily can 
testify. but to come to george who arrived at the ordinary among other 
gallants throws his cloak upon the table salutes the gentlemen and 
presently calls for a cup of canary. george had a pair of hose on that 
for some offence durst not to be seen in that hue they were first dyed 
in but from his first colour being a youthful green his long age turned 
him into a mournful black and for his antiquity was in print. which this 
busybody perceiving thought now to give it him to the quick and drawing 
near master peele looking upon his breeches by my troth sir quoth she 
these are exceedingly well printed. at which word george being a little 
moved in his mind that his old hose were called in question answered and 
by my faith mistress quoth george your face is most damnably ill 
painted. how mean you sir quoth she. marry thus mistress quoth george 
that if it were not for printing and painting my arse and your face 
would grow out of reparations. old eds. an. ed. pointing. see dyces 
_shakesp. gloss. s._ cressets. act iii. scene i. _the seashore._ _enter_ 
andrugio _in armour_ lucio _with a shepherds gown in his hand and a 
page_. _and._ is not yon gleam the shuddering morn that flakes with 
silver tincture the east verge of heaven _lu._ i think it is so please 
your excellence. _and._ away i have no excellence to please. prithee 
observe the custom of the world that only flatters greatness states 
exalts. and please my excellence o lucio thou hast been ever held 
respected dear even precious to andrugios inmost love. good flatter not. 
nay if thou givst not faith that i am wretched o read that read that. 
piero sforza _to the_ italian princes _fortune_. _lu._ reads _excellent 
the just overthrow_ andrugio _took in the venetian gulf hath so assured 
the genoways of the injustice of his cause and the hatefulness of his 
person that they have banishd him and all his family: and for 
confirmation of their peace with us have vowed that if he or his son can 
be attached to send us both their heads. we therefore by force of our 
united league forbid you to harbour him or his blood: but if you 
apprehend his person we entreat you to send him or his head to us. for 
we vow by the honour of our blood to recompense any man that bringeth 
his head with twenty thousand double pistolets and the endearing of our 
choicest love. from_ venice: piero sforza. _and._ my thoughts are fixd 
in contemplation why this huge earth this monstrous animal that eats her 
children should not have eyes and ears. philosophy maintains that 
natures wise and forms no useless or unperfect thing. did nature make 
the earth or the earth nature for earthly dirt makes all things makes 
the man moulds me up honour and like a cunning dutchman paints me a 
puppet even with seeming breath and gives a sot appearance of a soul. go 
to go to thou liest philosophy. nature forms things unperfect useless 
vain. why made she not the earth with eyes and ears that she might see 
desert and hear mens plaints that when a soul is splitted sunk with 
grief he might fall thus upon the breast of earth _he throws himself on 
the ground._ exclaiming thus: o thou allbearing earth which men do gape 
for till thou crammst their mouths and chokest their throats with dust o 
chaune thy breast and let me sink into thee look who knocks andrugio 
calls. but o shes deaf and blind: a wretch but lean relief on earth can 
find. _lu._ sweet lord abandon passion and disarm. since by the fortune 
of the tumbling sea we are rolld up upon the venice marsh lets clip all 
fortune lest more lowring fate _and._ more lowring fate o lucio choke 
that breath. now i defy chance: fortunes brow hath frownd even to the 
utmost wrinkle it can bend: her venoms spit. alas what country rests 
what son what comfort that she can deprive triumphs not venice in my 
overthrow gapes not my native country for my blood lies not my son tombd 
in the swelling main and yet more lowring fate theres nothing left unto 
andrugio but andrugio: and that nor mischief force distress nor hell can 
take. fortune my fortunes not my mind shall shake. _lu._ spoke like 
yourself but give me leave my lord to wish your safety. if you are but 
seen your arms display you therefore put them off and take . _and._ 
wouldst thou have me go unarmd among my foes being besiegd by passion 
entring lists to combat with despair and mighty grief my soul beleaguerd 
with the crushing strength of sharp impatience ha lucio go unarmd come 
soul resume the valour of thy birth myself myself will dare all 
opposites: ill muster forces an unvanquishd power: cornets of horse 
shall press th ungrateful earth this hollow wombd mass shall inly groan 
and murmur to sustain the weight of arms: ghastly amazement with 
upstarted hair shall hurry on before and usher us whilst trumpets 
clamour with a sound of death. _lu._ peace good my lord your speech is 
all too light. alas survey your fortunes look whats left of all your 
forces and your utmost hopes: a weak old man a page and your poor self. 
_and._ andrugio lives and a fair cause of arms why thats an army all 
invincible he who hath that hath a battalion royal armour of proof huge 
troops of barbd steeds main squares of pikes millions of harquebush. o a 
fair cause stands firm and will abide legions of angels fight upon her 
side. _lu._ then noble spirit slide in strange disguise unto some 
gracious prince and sojourn there till time and fortune give revenge 
firm means. _and._ no ill not trust the honour of a man. gold is grown 
great and makes perfidiousness a common waiter in most princes courts: 
hes in the checkroll ill not trust my blood i know none breathing but 
will cog a die for twenty thousand double pistolets. how goes the time 
_lu._ i saw no sun today. _and._ no sun will shine where poor andrugio 
breathes. my soul grows heavy: boy lets have a song: well sing yet faith 
even in despite of fate. _a song._ _and._ tis a good boy and by my troth 
well sung. o and thou feltst my grief i warrant thee thou wouldst have 
strook division to the height and made the life of music breathe: hold 
boy why so. for gods sake call me not andrugio that i may soon forget 
what i have been. for heavens name name not antonio that i may not 
remember he was mine. well ere yon sun set ill show myself worthy my 
blood. i was a duke thats all. no matter whither but from whence we 
fall. _exeunt._ open gr. chain chaun. cotgrave gives: to _chawne_ se 
fendre gercer crevasser crever se jarcer. old eds. speake and speak. the 
king enacts more wonders than a man daring an opposite to every danger. 
_richard iii._ _dilke._ cf. _richard iii._ v. : god and good angels 
fight on richmonds side. old eds. chekleroule. cog a die load a die. 
dilke compares _richard iii._ v. : who saw the sun today _rat._ not i my 
lord. _rich._ then he disdains to shine. omitted in ed. . variations in 
music. the sentiment is from senecas _thyestes_ l. : magis unde cadas 
quam quo refert. the situation of andrugio and lucio resembles that of 
lear and kent in that kings distresses. andrugio like lear manifests a 
kind of royal impatience a turbulent greatness an affected resignation. 
the enemies which he enters lists to combat despair and mighty grief and 
sharp impatience and the forces cornets of horse c. which he brings to 
vanquish them are in the boldest style of allegory. they are such a race 
of mourners as the infection of sorrows loud in the intellect might 
beget on some pregnant cloud in the imagination. _charles lamb._ scene 
ii. _palace of the duke of venice._ _enter_ feliche _walking unbraced_. 
_feli._ castilio alberto balurdo none up forobosco flattery nor thou up 
yet then theres no courtier stirring: thats firm truth i cannot sleep: 
feliche seldom rests in these court lodgings. i have walkd all night to 
see if the nocturnal court delights could force me envy their felicity: 
and by plain troth i will confess plain troth i envy nothing but the 
travense light. o had it eyes and ears and tongues it might see sport 
hear speech of most strange surquedries. o if that candlelight were made 
a poet he would prove a rare firking satirist and draw the core forth of 
imposthumd sin. well i thank heaven yet that my content can envy nothing 
but poor candlelight. as for the other glistering copper spangs that 
glisten in the tire of the court praise god i either hate or pity them. 
well here ill sleep till that the scene of up is passd at court. o calm 
hushd rich content is there a being blessedness without thee how soft 
thou downst the couch where thou dost rest nectar to life thou sweet 
ambrosian feast _enter_ castilio _and his page_ catzo: castilio _with a 
castingbottle_ _of sweet water in his hand sprinkling himself_. _cast._ 
am not i a most sweet youth now _cat._ yes when your throats perfumd 
your very words do smell of ambergris. o stay sir stay sprinkle some 
sweet water to your shoes heels that your mistress may swear you have a 
sweet foot. _cast._ good very good very passing passing good. _feli._ 
fut what treble minikin squeaks there ha good very good very very good 
_cast._ i will warble to the delicious conclave of my mistress ear: and 
strike her thoughts with the pleasing touch of my voice. _a song._ 
_cast._ feliche health fortune mirth and wine. _feli._ to thee my love 
divine. _cast._ i drink to thee sweeting. _feli._ _aside._ plague on 
thee for an ass _cast._ now thou hast seen the court by the perfection 
of it dost not envy it _feli._ i wonder it doth not envy me. why man i 
have been borne upon the spirits wings the souls swift pegasus the 
fantasy: and from the height of contemplation have viewd the feeble 
joints men totter on. i envy none but hate or pity all. for when i view 
with an intentive thought that creature fair but proud him rich but sot 
th other witty but unmeasured arrogant him great yet boundless in 
ambition him highborn but of base life t other feard yet feard fears and 
fears most to be loved him wise but made a fool for public use the other 
learned but selfopinionate: when i discourse all these and see myself 
nor fair nor rich nor witty great nor feard yet amply suited with all 
full content lord how i clap my hands and smooth my brow rubbing my 
quiet bosom tossing up a grateful spirit to omnipotence _cast._ hah hah 
but if thou knewst my happiness thou wouldst even grate away thy soul to 
dust in envy of my sweet beatitude. i cannot sleep for kisses i cannot 
rest for ladies letters that importune me with such unusd vehemence of 
love straight to solicit them that . _feli._ confusion seize me but i 
think thou liest. why should i not be sought to then as well fut 
methinks i am as like a man. troth i have a good head of hair a cheek 
not as yet wand a leg faith in the full. i ha not a red beard take not 
tobacco much: and slid for other parts of manliness _cast._ pew waw you 
neer accourted them in pomp put your good parts in presence graciously. 
ha and you had why they would ha come off sprung to your arms and sued 
and prayed and vowed and opened all their sweetness to your love. 
_feli._ there are a number of such things as thou have often urged me to 
such loose belief but slid you all do lie you all do lie. i have put on 
good clothes and smuggd my face strook a fair wench with a smart 
speaking eye courted in all sorts blunt and passionate had opportunity 
put them to the ah and by this light i find them wondrous chaste 
impregnable perchance a kiss or so: but for the rest o most inexorable 
_cast._ nay then ifaith prithee look here. _shows him the superscription 
of a seeming letter._ _feli. to her most esteemed loved and generous 
servant sig. castilio balthazar._ prithee from whom comes this faith i 
must see. _from her that is devoted to thee in most private sweets of 
love rossaline._ nay gods my comfort i must see the rest i must sans 
ceremony faith i must. feliche _takes away the letter by force_. _cast._ 
o you spoil my ruff unset my hair good away _feli. item for strait 
canvass thirteen pence halfpenny item for an ell and a half of taffeta 
to cover your old canvass doublet fourteen shillings and threepence._ 
slight this is a tailors bill. _cast._ in sooth it is the outside of her 
letter on which i took the copy of a tailors bill. _dil._ but tis not 
crossd i am sure of that. lord have mercy on him his credit hath given 
up the last gasp. faith ill leave him for he looks as melancholy as a 
wench the first night she _exit._ _feli._ honest muskcod twill not be so 
stitched together take that _striking him_ and that and belie no ladys 
love: swear no more by jesu this madam that lady hence go forswear the 
presence travel three years to bury this bastinado: avoid puffpaste 
avoid _cast._ and tell not my ladymother. well as i am a true gentleman 
if she had not willed me on her blessing not to spoil my face if i could 
not find in my heart to fight would i might neer eat a potatopie more. 
_exit._ _enter_ balurdo _backward_ dildo _following him with a 
lookingglass in one hand and a candle in the other hand_: flavia 
_following him backward with a lookingglass in one hand and a candle in 
the other_ rossaline _following her_ balurdo _and_ rossaline _stand 
setting of faces and so the scene begins_. _feli._ more fool more rare 
fools o for time and place long enough and large enough to act these 
fools here might be made a rare scene of folly if the plat could bear 
it. _bal._ by the sugarcandy sky hold up the glass higher that i may see 
to swear in fashion. o one loof more would ha made them shine gods neaks 
they would have shone like my mistress brow. even so the duke frowns for 
all this cursond world: o that gern kills it kills. by my golden whats 
the richest thing about me _dil._ your teeth. _bal._ by my golden teeth 
hold up that i may put in: hold up i say that i may see to put on my 
gloves. _dil._ o delicious sweetcheekd master if you discharge but one 
glance from the level of that set face o you will strike a wench youll 
make any wench love you. _bal._ by jesu i think i am as elegant a 
courtier as . how likest thou my suit _cat._ all beyond all no peregal: 
you are wondered at _aside._ for an ass. _bal._ well dildo no christen 
creature shall know hereafter what i will do for thee heretofore. _ros._ 
here wants a little white flavia. _dil._ ay but master you have one 
little fault you sleep openmouthd. _bal._ pew thou jestst. in good 
sadness ill have a lookingglass naild to the testern of the bed that i 
may see when i sleep whether tis so or not take heed you lie not: go to 
take heed you lie not. _fla._ by my troth you look as like the princess 
now ay but her lip is lip is a little redder a very little redder. 
_ros._ but by the help of art or nature ere i change my periwig mine 
shall be as red. _fla._ o ay that face that eye that smile that writhing 
of your body that wanton dandling of your fan becomes prethely so 
sweethly tis even the goodest lady that breathes the most amiable . 
faith the fringe of your satin petticoat is ript. good faith madam they 
say you are the most bounteous lady to your women that ever o most 
delicious beauty good madam let me kith it. _feli._ rare sport rare 
sport a female fool and a female flatterer. _ros._ body o me the duke 
away the glass _enter_ piero. _pier._ take up your paper rossaline. 
_ros._ not mine my lord. _pier._ not yours my lady ill see what tis. 
_bal._ and how does my sweet mistress o lady dear even as tis an old say 
tis an old horse can neither wighy nor wag his tail: even so do i hold 
my set face still: even so tis a bad courtier that can neither discourse 
nor blow his nose. _pier._ _reads._ _meet me at abrahams the jews where 
i bought my amazons disguise. a ship lies in the port ready bound for 
england make haste come private._ antonio. _enter_ castilio _and_ 
forobosco. forobosco alberto feliche castilio balurdo run keep the 
palace post to the ports go to my daughters chamber whither now scud to 
the jews stay run to the gates stop the gundolets let none pass the 
marsh do all at once antonio his head his head keep you the court the 
rest stand still or run or go or shout or search or scud or call or hang 
or dododo sususu something i know not whowhowho what i dododo nor 
whowhowho where i am. _o trista traditrice rea ribalda fortuna negando 
mi vindetta mi causa fera morte._ _exeunt all but_ feliche. _feli._ ha 
ha ha i could break my spleen at his impatience. _enter_ antonio _and_ 
mellida. _ant. alma et graziosa fortuna siate favorevole et fortunati 
siano voti del__la_ _mia dolce mellida mellida._ _mel._ alas antonio i 
have lost thy note a number mount my stairs ill straight return. _exit._ 
_feli._ antonio be not affright sweet prince appease thy fear buckle thy 
spirits up put all thy wits in wimble action or thou art surprised. 
_ant._ i care not. _feli.i. art mad or desperate or _ant._ both both all 
all: i prithee let me lie spite of you all i can and i will die. _feli.i 
you are distraught o this is madness breath _ant._ each man takes hence 
life but no man death: hes a good fellow and keeps open house: a 
thousand thousand ways lead to his gate to his widemouthd porch when 
niggard life hath but one little little wicket through. we wring 
ourselves into this wretched world to pule and weep exclaim to curse and 
rail to fret and ban the fates to strike the earth as i do now. antonio 
curse thy birth and die _feli.i nay heavens my comfort now you are 
perverse: you know i always loved you prithee live. wilt thou strike 
dead thy friends draw mourning tears _ant._ alas feliche i ha neer a 
friend no country father brother kinsman left to weep my fate or sigh my 
funeral: i roll but up and down and fill a seat in the dark cave of 
dusky misery. _feli._ fore heaven the duke comes hold you take my key 
slink to my chamber look you that is it: there shall you find a suit i 
wore at sea take it and slip away. nay precious if youll be peevish by 
this light ill swear thou raildst upon thy love before thou diedst and 
calld her strumpet. _ant._ shell not credit thee. _feli.i tut thats all 
one: i will defame thy love and make thy dead trunk held in vile regard. 
_ant._ wilt needs have it so why then antonio _vive esperanza in 
dispetto del fato._ _exit._ _enter_ piero galeatzo matzagente forobosco 
balurdo _and_ castilio _with weapons_. _pier._ o my sweet princes wast 
not bravely found even there i found the note even there it lay: i kiss 
the place for joy that there it lay. this way he went here let us make a 
stand: ill keep this gate myself. o gallant youth ill drink carouse unto 
your countrys health even in antonios skull. _bal._ lord bless us his 
breath is more fearful than a sergeants voice when he cries i arrest. 
_enter_ antonio _disguised as a sailor_. _ant._ stop antonio keep keep 
antonio _pier._ where where man where _ant._ here here: let me pursue 
him down the marsh _pier._ hold theres my signet take a gundelet: bring 
me his head his head and by mine honour ill make thee the wealthiest 
mariner that breathes. _ant._ ill sweat my blood out till i have him 
safe. _pier._ spoke heartily ifaith good mariner. o we will mount in 
triumph soon at night ill set his head up. lets think where. _bal._ upon 
his shoulders thats the fittest place for it. if it be not as fit as if 
it were made for them say balurdo thou art a sot an ass. _enter_ mellida 
_in pages attire dancing_. _pier._ sprightly ifaith. in troth hes 
somewhat like my daughter mellida: but alas poor soul her honours heels 
god knows arent half so light. _mel._ _aside._ escaped i am spite of my 
fathers spite. _exit._ _pier._ ho this will warm my bosom ere i sleep. 
_enter_ flavia _running_. _fla._ o my lord your daughter _pier._ ay ay 
my daughters safe enough i warrant thee. this vengeance on the boy will 
lengthen out my days unmeasuredly. it shall be chronicled in time to 
come piero sforza slew andrugios son. _fla._ ay but my lord your 
daughter _pier._ ay ay my good wench she is safe enough. _fla._ o then 
my lord you know shes run away. _pier._ run away away how run away 
_fla._ shes vanishd in an instant none knows whither. _pier._ pursue 
pursue fly run post scud away _feli._ _sings._ _and was not good king 
salomon_ c. _pier._ fly call run row ride cry shout hurry haste haste 
hurry shout cry ride row run call fly backward and forward every way 
about _maledetta fortuna che dura sorte che far che dir pur fugir tanto 
mal_ _cast._ twas you that struck me even now: was it not _feli._ it was 
i that struck you even now. _cast._ you bastinadoed me i take it. 
_feli._ i bastinadoed you and you took it. _cast._ faith sir i have the 
richest tobacco in the court for you i would be glad to make you 
satisfaction if i have wronged you. i would not the sun should set upon 
your anger give me your hand. _feli._ content faith so thoult breed no 
more such lies. i hate not man but mans lewd qualities. _exeunt._ so the 
old eds. but i suspect that the true reading is traverse light _i.e._ 
light cast slantwise. wanton excesses. see note p. . passing passing 
good. so ed. . ed. passing good. fiddlestring. here applied to castilios 
squeaky voice. old eds. most loved. so ed. . ed. courted. dilke gives 
accosted but spenser has the word _accourt_ in book ii. of the _faerie 
queene_. old eds. then. plot of the play. there is no meaning in the 
word loof: perhaps we should read one _touch_ more. balurdo seems to be 
beautifying some part of his person but his movements are not quite 
clear. gods neaks a meaningless oath constantly used by marston. a 
corruption of _christened_. snarl grin. the word is still used in the 
north country. equal. the words but by the help ... as red are given to 
flavia in the old eds. ed. gives this speech to balurdo. _i.e._ put the 
glass out of sight. neigh. cf. fletchers _women pleased_ iv. : this 
beast of babylon i will never back again his pace is sure prophane and 
his lewd _wihies_ the songs of hymyn and gymyn in the wilderness. so ben 
jonson in _every man out of his humour_ ii. : so the legerity for that 
and the _whighie_ and the daggers in the nose. gundolet old form of 
gondola. nimble. the word is used by spenser. should we not rather read 
hath but one little wicket _thorough which_ old eds. speake. ed. . 
honour. old eds. _chy condura sorta_. act iv. scene i. _seashore near 
venice._ _enter_ antonio _in his seagown running_. _ant._ stop stop 
antonio stay antonio vain breath vain breath antonios lost he cannot 
find himself not seize himself. alas this that you see is not antonio 
his spirit hovers in pieros court hurling about his agile faculties to 
apprehend the sight of mellida: but poor poor soul wanting apt 
instruments to speak or see stands dumb and blind sad spirit rolld up in 
gloomy clouds as black as air through which the rusty coach of night is 
drawn. tis so ill give you instance that tis so. conceit you me: as 
having claspd a rose within my palm the rose being taen away my hand 
retains a little breath of sweet: so may mans trunk his spirit slippd 
away hold still a faint perfume of his sweet guest. tis so for when 
discursive powers fly out and roam in progress through the bounds of 
heaven the soul itself gallops along with them as chieftain of this 
wingd troop of thought whilst the dull lodge of spirit standeth waste 
until the soul return from . what wast i said o this is naught but 
speckling melancholy. i have been that morpheus tender skinp cousin 
german bear with me good mellida: clod upon clod thus fall. hell is 
beneath yet heaven is over all. _falls on the ground._ _enter_ andrugio 
lucio _and_ page. _and._ come lucio lets go eat: what hast thou got 
roots roots alas they are seeded new cut up. o thou hast wrongd nature 
lucio: but boots not much thou but pursust the world that cuts off 
virtue fore it comes to growth lest it should seed and so oerrun her son 
dull purblind error. give me water boy. there is no poison int i hope 
they say that lurks in massy plate: and yet the earth is so infected 
with a general plague that hes most wise that thinks theres no man fool 
right prudent that esteems no creature just great policy the least 
things to mistrust. give me assay . how we mock greatness now _lu._ a 
strong conceit is rich so most men deem if not to be tis comfort yet to 
seem. _and._ why man i never was a prince till now. tis not the bard 
pate the bended knees gilt tipstaves tyrrian purple chairs of state 
troops of pied butterflies that flutter still in greatness summer that 
confirm a prince: tis not the unsavoury breath of multitudes shouting 
and clapping with confusd din that makes a prince. no lucio hes a king a 
true right king that dares do aught save wrong fears nothing mortal but 
to be unjust who is not blown up with the flattering puffs of spongy 
sycophants who stands unmovd despite the justling of opinion who can 
enjoy himself maugre the throng that strive to press his quiet out of 
him who sits upon joves footstool as i do adoring not affecting majesty 
whose brow is wreathd with the silver crown of clear content: this lucio 
is a king and of this empire every mans possest thats worth his soul. 
_lu._ my lord the genoways had wont to say _and._ name not the genoways: 
that very word unkings me quite makes me vile passions slave. o you that 
slide upon the glibbery ice of vulgar favour view andrugio. was never 
prince with more applause confirmd with louder shouts of triumph launchd 
out into the surgy main of government was never prince with more despite 
cast out left shipwrackd banishd on more guiltless ground. o rotten 
props of the crazed multitude how you still double falter under the 
lightest chance that strains your veins alas one battle lost your 
whorish love your drunken healths your houts and shouts your smooth _god 
saves_ and all your devils lost that tempts our quiet to your hell of 
throngs spit on me lucio for i am turnd slave: observe how passion 
domineers oer me. _lu._ no wonder noble lord having lost a son a country 
crown and . _and._ ay lucio having lost a son a son a country house 
crown son. _o lares miseri lares_ which shall i first deplore my son my 
son my dear sweet boy my dear antonio _ant._ antonio _and._ ay echo ay i 
mean antonio. _ant._ antonio who means antonio _and._ where art what art 
knowst thou antonio _ant._ yes. _and._ lives he _ant._ no. _and._ where 
lies he dead _ant._ here. _and._ where _ant._ here. _and._ art thou 
antonio _ant._ i think i am. _and._ dost thou but think what dost not 
know thyself _ant._ he is a fool that thinks he knows himself. _and._ 
upon thy faith to heaven give thy name. _ant._ i were not worthy of 
andrugios blood if i denied my names antonio. _and._ i were not worthy 
to be calld thy father if i denied my name andrugio. and dost thou live 
o let me kiss thy cheek and dew thy brow with trickling drops of joy. 
now heavens will be done: for i have lived to see my joy my son antonio. 
give me thy hand now fortune do thy worst his blood that lappd thy 
spirit in the womb thus in his love will make his arms thy tomb. _ant._ 
bless not the body with your twining arms which is accursd of heaven. o 
what black sin hath been committed by our ancient house whose scalding 
vengeance lights upon our heads that thus the world and fortune casts us 
out as loathd objects ruins branded slaves _and._ do not expostulate the 
heavens will but o remember to forget thyself forget remembrance what 
thou once hast been. come creep with me from out this open air: even 
trees have tongues and will betray our life. i am araising of our house 
my boy which fortune will not envy tis so mean and like the world all 
dirt: there shalt thou rip the inwards of thy fortunes in mine ears 
while i sit weeping blind with passions tears. then ill begin and well 
such order keep that one shall still tell griefs the other weep. 
_exeunt_ andrugio _and_ lucio _leaving_ antonio _and the_ page. _ant_. 
ill follow you. boy prithee stay a little. thou hast had a good voice if 
this cold marsh wherein we lurk have not corrupted it. _enter_ mellida 
_standing out of sight in her pages suit_. i prithee sing but sirra mark 
you me let each note breathe the heart of passion the sad extracture of 
extremest grief. make me a strain speak groaning like a bell that tolls 
departing souls breathe me a point that may enforce me weep to wring my 
hands to break my cursd breast rave and exclaim lie grovelling on the 
earth straight start up frantic crying mellida sing but _antonio hath 
lost mellida_ and thou shalt see me like a man possessd howl out such 
passion that even this brinish marsh will squeeze out tears from out his 
spongy cheeks: the rocks even groan and prithee prithee sing or i shall 
neer ha done when i am in tis harder for me end than to begin. _the boy 
runs a note_ antonio _breaks it_. for look thee boy my grief that hath 
no end i may begin to plain but prithee sing. _a song._ _mel._ heaven 
keep you sir _ant._ heaven keep you from me sir _mel._ i must be 
acquainted with you sir. _ant._ wherefore art thou infected with misery 
seard with the anguish of calamity art thou true sorrow hearty grief 
canst weep i am not for thee if thou canst not rave antonio _falls on 
the ground_. fall flat on the ground and thus exclaim on heaven: o 
trifling nature why inspiredst thou breath _mel._ stay sir i think you 
namd mellida. _ant._ knowst thou mellida _mel._ yes. _ant._ hast thou 
seen mellida _mel._ yes. _ant._ then hast thou seen the glory of her sex 
the music of nature the unequalld lustre of unmatchd excellence the 
united sweet of heavens graces the most adord beauty that ever strook 
amazement in the world _mel._ you seem to love her. _ant._ with my very 
soul. _mel._ shell not requite it: all her love is fixd upon a gallant 
one antonio the duke of genoas son. i was her page and often as i waited 
she would sigh o dear antonio and to strengthen thought would clip my 
neck and kiss and kiss me thus. therefore leave loving her: fa faith 
methinks her beauty is not half so ravishing as you discourse of she 
hath a freckled face a low forehead and a lumpish eye. _ant._ o heaven 
that i should hear such blasphemy boy rogue thou liest and _spavento del 
mio cor dolce mellida di grave morte ristoro vero dolce mellida celeste 
salvatrice sovrana mellida del mio sperar trofeo vero mellida._ _mel. 
diletta e soave anima mia antonio godevole bellezza cortese antonio. 
signior mio e virginal amore bellantonio gusto delli miei sensi 
carantonio._ _ant. o svanisce il cor in un soave bacio._ _mel. muoiono i 
sensi nel desiato desio:_ _ant. nel cielo pu esser belt pi chiara_ 
_mel._ nel mondo pu esser belt pi chiara_ _ant. dammi un bacio da quella 
bocca beata lasciami coglier laura odorata che ha sua seggia in quelle 
dolci labbra._ _mel. dammi per impero del tuo graditamore che bea me con 
sempiterno honore cos cos mi converr morir._ good sweet scout oer the 
marsh for my heart trembles at every little breath that strikes my ear. 
when thou returnest then i will discourse how i deceivd the court then 
thou shalt tell how thou escapedst the watch: well point our speech with 
amorous kissing commas and even suck the liquid breath from out each 
others lips. _ant._ dull clod no man but such sweet favour clips. i go 
and yet my panting blood persuades me stay. turn coward in her sight 
away away _exit._ _page._ i think confusion of babel is falln upon those 
lovers that they change their language but i fear me my master having 
but feigned the person of a woman hath got their unfeigned imperfection 
and is grown double tongued: as for mellida she were no woman if she 
could not yield strange language. but howsoever if i should sit in 
judgment tis an error easier to be pardoned by the auditors than excused 
by the authors and yet some private respect may rebate the edge of the 
keener censure. _enter_ piero castilio matzagente forobosco feliche 
galeatzo _at one door_ balurdo _and his_ page _at another door_. _pier._ 
this way she took: search my sweet gentlemen. how now balurdo canst thou 
meet with anybody _bal._ as i am true gentleman i made my horse sweat 
that he hath neer a dry thread on him: and i can meet with no living 
creature but men and beasts. in good sadness i would have sworn i had 
seen mellida even now for i saw a thing stir under a hedge and i peepd 
and i spied a thing and i peerd and i tweerd underneath: and truly a 
right wise man might have been deceived for it was . _pier._ what in the 
name of heaven _bal._ a dun cow. _feli._ shad neer a kettle on her head 
_pier._ boy didst thou see a young lady pass this way _gal._ why speak 
you not _bal._ gods neaks proud elf give the duke reverence stand bare 
with a . whogh heavens bless me mellida mellida _pier._ where man where 
_bal._ turned man turned man women wear the breeches. lo here _pier._ 
light and unduteous kneel not peevish elf speak not entreat not shame 
unto my house curse to my honour. wheres antonio thou traitress to my 
hate what is he shippd for england now well whimpering harlot hence 
_mel._ good father _pier._ good me no goods. seest thou that sprightly 
youth ere thou canst term tomorrow morning old thou shalt call him thy 
husband lord and love. _mel._ ay me _pier._ blirt on your ay mes guard 
her safely hence. drag her away ill be your guard tonight. young prince 
mount up your spirits and prepare to solemnise your nuptials eve with 
pomp. _gal._ the time is scant: now nimble wits appear: phoebus begins 
to gleam the welkins clear. _exeunt all but_ balurdo _and his_ page. 
_bal._ now nimble wits appear ill myself appear balurdos self that in 
quick wit doth surpass will show the substance of a complete . _dil._ 
ass ass. _bal._ ill mount my courser and most gallantly prick . _dil._ 
gallantly prick is too long and stands hardly in the verse sir. _bal._ 
ill speak pure rhyme and will so bravely prank it that ill toss love 
like a prank prank it a rhyme for prank it _dil._ blanket. _bal._ that 
ill toss love like a dog in a blanket. hah hah indeed law. i think hah 
hah i think hah hah i think i shall tickle the muses. and i strike it 
not dead say balurdo thou art an arrant sot. _dil._ balurdo thou art an 
arrant sot. _enter_ andrugio _and_ antonio _wreathed together_ lucio. 
_and._ now come united force of chapfalln death come power of fretting 
anguish leave distress. o thus enfolded we have breasts of proof gainst 
all the venomd stings of misery. _ant._ father now i have an antidote 
gainst all the poison that the world can breathe: my mellida my mellida 
doth bless this bleak waste with her presence. how now boy why dost thou 
weep alas wheres mellida _page._ ay me my lord. _ant._ a sudden horror 
doth invade my blood my sinews tremble and my panting heart scuds round 
about my bosom to go out dreading the assailant horrid passion. o be no 
tyrant kill me with one blow speak quickly briefly boy. _page._ her 
father found and seized her she is gone. _and._ son heat thy blood be 
not froze up with grief courage sweet boy sink not beneath the weight of 
crushing mischief. o wheres thy dauntless heart thy fathers spirit i 
renounce thy blood if thou forsake thy valour. _lu._ see how his grief 
speaks in his slowpaced steps. alas tis more than he can utter let him 
go: dumb solitary path best suiteth woe. _exit_ antonio. _and._ give me 
my arms my armour lucio. _lu._ dear lord what means this rage when 
lacking use scarce safes your life will you in armour rise _and._ 
fortune fears valour presseth cowardice. _lu._ then valour gets applause 
when it hath place and means to blaze it. _and. nunquam potest non 
esse._ _lu._ patience my lord may bring your ills some end. _and._ what 
patience friend can ruind hopes attend come let me die like old andrugio 
worthy my birth. o bloodtruehonourd graves are far more blessd than base 
life of slaves. _exeunt._ a correspondent of _notes and queries_ st ser. 
vol. ix. p. points out that erasmus has the same simile: anima qu 
moderatur utrumque corpus animantis improprie dicitur anima cum revera 
sint anim reliqui non aliter quam odor rosarum manet in manu etiam rosa 
sublata. _colloq._ leyden ed. i. . old ed. holds. these ravings are 
unintelligible. the stagedirection in the old eds. is _enter andrugio 
lucio cole and norwood._ i suppose that cole and norwood are the names 
of the actors who personated andrugio and lucio. give me assay taste it 
before i drink. the _assayer_ in courts and baronial halls was the 
officer who tasted the dishes before the banquet in order to make sure 
that no poison was concealed. old eds. _made open_ the glibbery ice 
which modern editors absurdly retain. the word glibbery has been already 
noticed note p. . cf. _julius csar_ i. text of first folio: and then he 
offered it the third time hee put it the third time by and still as hee 
refusd it the rabblement _howted_ and clappd their chopt hands. in that 
passage the first three folios give _howted_ and the fourth _houted_ but 
modern editors reject the word and read either _hooted_ or _shouted_. 
the present passage of marston affords strong warrant for restoring the 
reading of the folios. _hout_ is clearly an onomatopoeic word like 
_hoit_: he sings and _hoits_ and revels among his drunken companions 
_knight of the burning pestle_. old eds. last and so modern editors. old 
eds. _misereri_. antonio is concealed behind a bush. so ed. . ed. on. 
old eds. _suamisce_. dilke reads _smarisce_. old eds. _murono_. old eds. 
_pol._ so dilke. old eds. _bassiammi_. old eds. _che in sua neggia in 
quello_ c. old eds. repeat the word kissing. in good sadness seriously. 
tweer or twire peep pry. the dun cow is we all know intimately connected 
with the celebrated guy earl of warwick and i believe his kettle is one 
of the pretended relics still shown there. from the text i conjecture 
that the dun cow with the kettle on her head was in the time of marston 
a wellknown sign. _dilke._ omitted in ed. . old eds. _ant._ old eds. 
_and._ it is hard for andrugio to escape detection even when he is 
unarmed but if he puts on his armour he will be at once recognised. cf. 
p. : if you are but seen your arms display you therefore put them off. 
act v. scene i. _palace of the duke of venice._ _enter_ balurdo _a_ 
painter _with two pictures_ _and_ dildo. _bal._ and are you a painter 
sir can you draw can you draw _pa._ yes sir. _bal._ indeed law now so 
can my fathers forehorse. and are these the workmanship of your hands 
_pa._ i did limn them. _bal._ limn them a good word limn them: whose 
picture is this _anno domini_ . believe me master anno domini was of a 
good settled age when you limnd him: years old lets see the other. 
_tatis su_ . byrlady he is somewhat younger. belike master _tatis su_ 
was _anno dominis_ son. _pa._ is not your master a _dil._ he hath a 
little proclivity to him. _pa._ proclivity good youth i thank you for 
your courtly proclivity. _bal._ approach good sir. i did send for you to 
draw me a device an imprezza by _synecdoche a mott_. by phoebus crimson 
taffeta mantle i think i speak as melodiously look you sir how think you 
ont i would have you paint me for my device a good fat leg of ewe mutton 
swimming in stewed broth of plums boy keel your mouth it runs over and 
the word shall be _hold my dish whilst i spill my pottage_. sure in my 
conscience twould be the most sweet device now. _pa._ twould scent of 
kitchenstuff too much. _bal._ gods neaks now i remember me i ha the 
rarest device in my head that ever breathed. can you paint me a 
driveling reeling song and let the word be uh. _pa._ a belch _bal._ o no 
no: uh paint me uh or nothing. _pa._ it cannot be done sir but by a 
seeming kind of drunkenness. _bal._ no well let me have a good massy 
ring with your own posy graven in it that must sing a small treble word 
for word thus: _and if you will my true lover be come follow me to the 
green wood._ _pa._ o lord sir i cannot make a picture sing. _bal._ why 
slid i have seen painted things sing as sweet but i havet will tickle it 
for a conceit ifaith. _enter_ feliche _and_ alberto. _alb._ o dear 
feliche give me thy device. how shall i purchase love of rossaline 
_feli._ swill flatter her soundly. _alb._ her love is such i cannot 
flatter her: but with my utmost vehemence of speech i have adord her 
beauties. _feli._ hast writ good moving unaffected rhymes to her _alb._ 
o yes feliche but she scorns my writ. _feli._ hast thou presented her 
with sumptuous gifts _alb._ alas my fortunes are too weak to offer them. 
_feli._ o then i have it ill tell thee what to do. _alb._ what good 
feliche _feli._ go and hang thyself i say go hang thyself if that thou 
canst not give go hang thyself: ill rhyme thee dead or verse thee to the 
rope. how thinkst thou of a poet that sung thus _munera sola pacant sola 
addunt munera formam: munere sollicites pallada cypris erit._ _munera 
munera_ _alb._ ill go and breathe my woes unto the rocks and spend my 
grief upon the deafest seas. ill weep my passion to the senseless trees 
and load most solitary air with plaints. for woods trees sea or rocky 
apennine is not so ruthless as my rossaline. farewell dear friend expect 
no more of me: here ends my part in this loves comedy. _exeunt_ alberto 
_and_ painter. _feli._ now master balurdo whither are you going ha 
_bal._ signior feliche how do you faith and by my troth how do you 
_feli._ whither art thou going bully _bal._ and as heaven help me how do 
you how do you ifaith hee _feli._ whither art going man _bal._ o god to 
the court ill be willing to give you grace and good countenance if i may 
but see you in the presence. _feli._ o to court farewell. _bal._ if you 
see one in a yellow taffeta doublet cut upon carnation velure a green 
hat a blue pair of velvet hose a gilt rapier and an orangetawny pair of 
worsted silk stockings thats i thats i. _feli._ very good: farewell. 
_bal._ ho you shall know me as easily i ha bought me a new green feather 
with a red sprig you shall see my wrought shirt hang out at my breeches 
you shall know me. _feli._ very good very good farewell. _bal._ marry in 
the mask twill be somewhat hard. but if you hear anybody speak so 
wittily that he makes all the room laugh thats i thats i. farewell good 
signior. _enter_ forobosco castilio _a boy carrying a gilt harp_ piero 
mellida _in night apparel_ rossaline flavia _two pages_. _pier._ advance 
the musics prize now capring wits rise to your highest mount let choice 
delight garland the brow of this triumphant night. sfoot a sits like 
lucifer himself. _ros._ good sweet duke first let their voices strain 
for musics prize. give me the golden harp: faith with your favour ill be 
umperess. _pier._ sweet niece content: boys clear your voice and sing. 
_first boy sings._ _ros._ by this gold i had rather have a servant with 
a short nose and a thin hair than have such a highstretchd minikin 
voice. _pier._ fair niece your reason _ros._ by the sweet of love i 
should fear extremely that he were an eunuch. _cast._ spark spirit how 
like you his voice _ros._ spark spirit how like you his voice so help me 
youth thy voice squeaks like a dry corkshoe: come come lets hear the 
next. _second boy sings._ _pier._ trust me a strong mean. well sung my 
boy. _enter_ balrudo. _bal._ hold hold hold: are ye blind could ye not 
see my voice coming for the harp and i knock not division on the head 
take hence the harp make me a slip and let me go but for ninepence. sir 
mark strike up for master balurdo. _third boy sings._ judgment gentlemen 
judgment wast not above line i appeal to your mouths that heard my song. 
do me right and dub me knight balurdo. _ros._ kneel down and ill dub 
thee knight of the golden harp. _bal._ indeed law do and ill make you 
lady of the silver fiddlestick. _ros._ come kneel kneel. _enter a page 
to_ balurdo. _bal._ my troth i thank you it hath never a whistle int. 
_ros._ nay good sweet coz raise up your drooping eyes and i were at the 
point of _to have and to hold from this day forward_ i would be ashamd 
to look thus lumpish. what my pretty coz tis but the loss of an odd 
maidenhead. shalls dance thou art so sad hark in thine ear: i was about 
to say but ill forbear. _bal._ i come i come more than most honeysuckle 
sweet ladies pine not for my presence ill return in pomp. well spoke sir 
jeffrey balurdo. as i am a true knight i feel honourable eloquence begin 
to grope me already. _exit._ _pier._ faith mad niece i wonder when thou 
wilt marry _ros._ faith kind uncle when men abandon jealousy forsake 
taking of tobacco and cease to wear their beards so rudely long. o to 
have a husband with a mouth continually smoking with a bush of furze on 
the ridge of his chin ready still to flop into his foaming chaps ah tis 
more than most intolerable. _pier._ nay faith sweet niece i was mighty 
strong in thought we should have shut up night with an old comedy: the 
prince of florence shall have mellida and thou shouldst have . _ros._ 
nobody good sweet uncle. i tell you sir i have thirtynine servants and 
my monkey that makes the fortieth. now i love all of them lightly for 
something but affect none of them seriously for anything. ones a 
passionate fool and he flatters me above belief the seconds a testy ape 
and he rails at me beyond reason the thirds as grave as some censor and 
he strokes up his mustachios three times and makes six plots of set 
faces before he speaks one wise word the fourths as dry as the bur of an 
hartichoke the fifth paints and hath always a good colour for what he 
speaks the sixth . _pier._ stay stay sweet niece what makes you thus 
suspect your gallants worth _ros._ o when i see one wear a periwig i 
dread his hair another wallow in a great slop i mistrust the proportion 
of his thigh and wears a ruffled boot i fear the fashion of his leg. 
thus something in each thing one trick in everything makes me mistrust 
imperfection in all parts and theres the full point of my addiction. 
_the cornets sound a senet. enter_ galeatzo matzagente _and_ balurdo _in 
maskery_. _pier._ the rooms too scant: boys stand in there close. _mel._ 
_to_ galeatzo. in faith fair sir i am too sad to dance. _pier._ hows 
that hows that too sad by heaven dance and grace him too or go to i say 
no more. _mel._ a burning glass the word _splendente phoebo_ it is too 
curious i conceit it not. _gal._ faith ill tell thee. ill no longer burn 
than you will shine and smile upon my love. for look ye fairest by your 
pure sweets i do not dote upon your excellence and faith unless you shed 
your brightest beams of sunny favour and acceptive grace upon my tender 
love i do not burn: marry but shine and ill reflect your beams with 
fervent ardour. faith i would be loath to flatter thee fair soul because 
i love not dote court like thy husband which thy father swears tomorrow 
morn i must be. this is all and now from henceforth trust me mellida ill 
not speak one wise word to thee more. _mel._ i trust ye. _gal._ by my 
troth ill speak pure fool to thee now. _mel._ you will speak the liker 
yourself. _gal._ good faith ill accept of the coxcomb so you will not 
refuse the bable. _mel._ nay good sweet keep them both i am enamoured of 
neither. _gal._ go to i must take you down for this. lend me your ear. 
_ros._ a glowworm the word _splendescit tantm tenebris_. _mat._ o lady 
the glowworm figurates my valour which shineth brightest in most dark 
dismal and horrid achievements. _ros._ or rather your glowworm 
represents your wit which only seems to have fire in it though indeed 
tis but an _ignis fatuus_ and shines only in the dark dead night of 
fools admiration. _mat._ lady my wit hath spurs if it were disposd to 
ride you. _ros._ faith sir your wits spurs have but walking rowels dull 
blunt they will not draw blood: the gentlemenushers may admit them the 
presence for any wrong they can do to ladies. _bal._ truly i have 
strained a note above ela for a device: look you tis a fairruled singing 
book the word _perfect if it were prickd_. _fla._ though you are maskd i 
can guess who you are by your wit. you are not the exquisite balurdo the 
most rarelyshaped balurdo. _bal._ who i no i am not sir jeffrey balurdo. 
i am not as well known by my wit as an alehouse by a red lattice. i am 
not worthy to love and be beloved of flavia. _fla._ i will not scorn to 
favour such good parts as are applauded in your rarest self. _bal._ 
truly you speak wisely and like a jantlewoman of fourteen years of age. 
you know the stone called _lapis_ the nearer it comes to the fire the 
hotter it is: and the bird which the geometricians call _avis_ the 
farther it is from the earth the nearer it is to the heaven and love the 
nigher it is to the flame the more remote theres a word remote the more 
remote it is from the frost. your wit is quick a little thing pleaseth a 
young lady and a small favour contenteth an old courtier and so sweet 
mistress i truss my codpiece point. _enter_ feliche. _pier._ what might 
import this flourish bring us word. _feli._ stand away: heres such a 
company of flyboats hulling about this galleasse of greatness that 
theres no boarding him. do you hear yon thing calld duke _pier._ how now 
blunt feliche whats the news _feli._ yonders a knight hath brought 
andrugios head and craves admittance to your chair of state. _cornets 
sound a senet. enter_ andrugio _in armour_. _pier._ conduct him with 
attendance sumptuous sound all the pleasing instruments of joy make 
triumph stand on tiptoe whilst we meet: o sight most gracious o revenge 
most sweet _and. we vow by the honour of our birth to recompense any man 
that bringeth andrugios head with twenty thousand double pistolets and 
the endearing to our choicest love._ _pier._ we still with most unmoved 
resolve confirm our large munificence and here breathe a sad and solemn 
protestation: when i recall this vow o let our house be even commanded 
staind and trampled on as worthless rubbish of nobility. _and._ then 
here _raising his beaver_ piero is andrugios head royally casqud in a 
helm of steel: give me thy love and take it. my dauntless soul hath that 
unbounded vigour in his spirits that it can bear more rank indignity 
with less impatience than thy cankerd hate can sting and venom his 
untainted worth with the most viprous sound of malice. strike o let no 
glimpse of honour light thy thoughts if there be any heat of royal 
breath creeping in thy veins o stifle it be still thyself bloody and 
treacherous. fame not thy house with an admird act of princely pity. 
piero i am come to soil thy house with an eternal blot of savage cruelty 
strike or bid me strike. i pray my death that thy neerdying shame might 
live immortal to posterity. come be a princely hangman stop my breath. o 
dread thou shame no more than i dread death. _pier._ we are amazed our 
royal spirits numbd in stiff astonishd wonder at thy prowess. most 
mighty valiant and hightowring heart we blush and turn our hate upon 
ourselves for hating such an unpeerd excellence. i joy my state: him 
whom i loathd before that now i honour love nay more adore. _the still 
flutes sound a mournful senet. enter a funeral procession followed by_ 
lucio. but stay what tragic spectacle appears whose body bear you in 
that mournful hearse _lu._ the breathless trunk of young antonio. _mel._ 
antonio ay me my lord my love my . _and._ sweet precious issue of most 
honourd blood rich hope ripe virtue o untimely loss come hither friend: 
prithee do not weep. why i am glad hes dead he shall not see his fathers 
vanquishd by his enemy even in princely honour. nay prithee speak how 
died the wretched boy _lu._ my lord _and._ i hope he died yet like my 
son ifaith. _lu._ alas my lord _and._ he died unforced i trust and 
valiantly _lu._ poor gentleman being _and._ did his hand shake or his 
eye look dull his thoughts reel fearful when he struck the stroke and if 
they did ill rend them out the hearse rip up his cerecloth mangle his 
bleak face that when he comes to heaven the powers divine shall neer 
take notice that he was my son: ill quite disclaim his birth. nay 
prithee speak and twere not hooped with steel my breast would break. 
_mel._ o that my spirit in a sigh could mount into the sphere where thy 
sweet soul doth rest _pier._ o that my tears bedewing thy wan cheek 
could make new spirit sprout in thy cold blood _bal._ verily he looks as 
pitifully as a poor john as i am true knight i could weep like a stond 
horse. _and._ villain tis thou hast murderd my son thy unrelenting 
spirit thou black dog that tookst no passion of his fatal love hath 
forced him give his life untimely end. _pier._ o that my life her love 
my dearest blood would but redeem one minute of his breath _ant._ 
_rising_. i seize that breath. stand not amazed great states i rise from 
death that never lived till now. piero keep thy vow and i enjoy more 
unexpressd height of happiness than power of thought can reach if not lo 
here there stands my tomb and here a pleasing stage. mostwishd 
spectators of my tragedy to this end have i feignd that her fair eye for 
whom i lived might bless me ere i die. _mel._ can breath depaint my 
unconceivd thoughts can words describe my infinite delight of seeing 
thee my lord antonio o no conceit breath passion words be dumb whilst i 
instill the dew of my sweet bliss in the soft pressure of a melting kiss 
_sic sic juvat ire sub umbras._ _pier._ fair son now ill be proud to 
call thee son enjoy me thus: my very breast is thine possess me freely i 
am wholly thine. _ant._ dear father _and._ sweet son sweet son i can 
speak no more: my joys passion flows above the shore and chokes the 
current of my speech. _pier._ young florence prince to you my lips must 
beg for a remittance of your interest. _gal._ in your fair daughter with 
all my thought. so help me faith the nakd truth ill unfold he that was 
never hot will soon be cold. _pier._ no man else makes claim unto her 
_mat._ the valiant speak truth in brief: no _bal._ truly for sir jeffrey 
balurdo he disclaims to have had anything in her. _pier._ then here i 
give her to antonio. royal valiant most respected prince lets clip our 
hands ill thus observe my vow: i promised twenty thousand double 
pistolets with the endearing to my dearest love to him that brought thy 
head thine be the gold to solemnise our houses unity my love be thine 
the all i have be thine. fill us fresh wine the form well take by this 
well drink a health while they two sip a kiss. now there remains no 
discord that can sound harsh accents to the ear of our accord: so please 
you niece to match. _ros._ troth uncle when my sweetfaced coz hath told 
me how she likes the thing called wedlock may be ill take a survey of 
the checkroll of my servants and he that hath the best parts of ill 
prick him down for my husband. _bal._ for passion of love now remember 
me to my mistress lady rossaline when she is pricking down the good 
parts of her servants. as i am true knight i grow stiff i shall carry 
it. _pier._ i will. sound lydian wires once make a pleasing note on 
nectar streams of your sweet airs to float. _ant._ here ends the comic 
crosses of true love o may the passage most successful prove cool. to 
_keel the pot_ was to stir the contents gently in order to keep them 
from boiling over. motto. so ed. . ed. thou wilt. a familiar form of 
address. a sort of velvet. in _every man out of his humour_ iv. after 
fastidious brisk has been describing the damage done to his finery in a 
duel carlo observes i wonder he speaks not of his _wrought shirt_. 
gifford remarks the linen both of men and women was either so worked as 
to resemble the finest lace or was ornamented by the needle with 
representations of fruits flowers passages of history c. ed. price. this 
play was acted by the pauls children whose voices were carefully 
trained: hence the frequent introduction of songs. see note p. . their 
_corkd shoes_ to bear them high. stephen gossons _pleasant quips c._ see 
note p. . slip counterfeit coin. do me right and dub me knight. part of 
an old catch. so silence in _ henry iv._ v. : do me right and dub me 
knight samingo. again in nashes _summers last will and testament_: _all. 
monsieur mingo for quaffing did surpass in cup in can or glass._ _bac._ 
ho well shot a toucher a toucher. _for quaffing toy doth pass in cup in 
can or glass._ _all. god bacchus do him right and dub him knight._ old 
eds. mine. old eds. millane but galeatzo son of the duke of florence was 
the suitor whom piero had chosen. cf. p. : young florence prince to you 
my lips must be for a remittance of your interest. wide loose breeches. 
ruffled boot. see notes on middleton i. viii. . motto. speak pure fool. 
this is idiomatic and is in sense equivalent to i will speak like a pure 
fool. thus in _othello_ act ii. drunk and speak parrot that is talk 
foolishly or idly like a parrot. _halliwell_. old form of bauble. the 
highest note in the scale. cf. nashes _christs tears over jerusalem_ 
_works_ ed. grosart v. : no no either you must _strain your wits an ela 
above_ theirs c. the form of expression is not uncommon. a red lattice 
was the distinguishing mark of a tavern. flyboat span. filibote a 
fastsailing vessel. to float to swim as borne along or driven by wind or 
water. dyces _shakesp. glossary_. a large galley. old eds. resolvd. poor 
john inferior dried hake. ed. as poor john. sorrow pity. depict. old 
eds. nere. sip a kiss a translation of the latin expression oscula 
libare. old eds. your. epilogus. _and._ gentlemen though i remain an 
armed epilogue i stand not as a peremptory challenger of desert either 
for him that composed the comedy or for us that acted it but a most 
submissive suppliant for both. what imperfection you have seen in us 
leave with us and well amend it what hath pleased you take with you and 
cherish it. you shall not be more ready to embrace anything commendable 
than we will endeavour to amend all things reprovable. what we are is by 
your favour. what we shall be rests all in your applausive 
encouragements. _exeunt._ 
